And you see that manifest itself on D-Day where you've got 6,939 vessels of which there are 1,213 warships, 4,127 assaultcraft, 12 a half thousand aircraft, you know, 155,000 men landed and dropped from the air in 24-hour period. It is phenomenal. It is absolutely phenomenal. The following is a conversation with James Holland, a historian specializing in World War II, who has written a lot of amazing books on the subject, especially covering the Western Front, often providing fascinating details at multiple levels of analysis, including strategic, operational, tactical, technological, and of course, the human side, the personal accounts from the war. He also co-hosts a great podcast on World War II called We Have Ways of Making You Talk. This is a Lex Freeman podcast. To support it, please check out our sponsors in the description or at lexfreeman.com/sponsors. And now, dear friends, here's James Holland. In volume one of the war in the west, your book series on World War II, you write, "The Second World War witnessed the deaths of more than 60 million people from over 60 different countries. Entire cities were laid waste. National borders were redrawn. And many millions more people found themselves displaced. Over the past couple of decades, many of those living in the Middle East or parts of Africa, the Balkans, Afghanistan, and even the United States may feel justifiably that these troubled times have already proved the most traumatic in their recent past. Yet, globally, the Second World War was and remains the single biggest catastrophe of modern history. In terms of human drama, it is unrivaled. No other war has affected so many lives in such a large number of countries. So what to you makes World War II the biggest catastrophe in human drama in modern history and maybe from a historian perspective the most fascinating subject to study thing about World War II is it really is truly global. You know it's fought in deserts. It's fought in in in the Arctic. Um it's fought across oceans. It's fought in the air. Um it's in jungle. It's in the hills. It is on the beaches. Um it's also on the Russian step and it's also in Ukraine. Um so it's it's it's that global nature of it. And I just think you know where there's where there's war there is always incredible human drama. And I think for most people and certainly the true in my case you get drawn to the human drama of it. It's that thought that you know gosh if I'd been 20 years old how would I have dealt with it? You know would I have been in the army? Would I have been in the air force? would I been on a you know Royal Navy destroyer or you know how would I have coped with it and how would I have dealt with that separation? I mean I've interviewed people who were away for four years. I remember talking to a tank man from uh from Liverpool in England called Sam Bradshaw and he went away for four years and when he came home he'd been twice wounded. He'd been very badly wounded in North Africa and then he was shot in the neck in Italy. Eventually got home when he came home his mother had turned gray. his little baby sister who had been, you know, 13 when he left, was now a a young woman. His old school had been destroyed by Luftwaffer bombs. He didn't recognize the place. And do you know what he did? He joined up again, went back out of Europe and was one of the first people in Bellson. So, you know, what was his justification for that for joining right back? He just felt completely disconnected to home. He felt that the the gulf of time, his experiences had separated him from all the normalities of life. And he felt that the the the normalities of the life that he had known before he'd gone away to war had just been severed in a really kind of cruel way that he didn't really feel he was able to confront at that particular point, but he decided to rejoin. Couldn't go back to the Third World Royal Tank Regiment. So, it went back to a different unit. Went from kind of the Italian campaign to European theater. um didn't see so much action at the end, but you know uh like a lot of British troops if if you were in a certain division at a certain time you know you ended up passing very close to Bellson and you know you suddenly realized okay this was the right thing to do you know we did have to get rid of Nazism we did have to do this because this is the consequence it's not just the oppression it's just not just the secret police it's not just the expansionism of Nazism it is also you know the Holocaust which hadn't been given its name at that point but but you know you're witnessing this kind of untold or cruelty. Um, and I always, you know, I've always sort of I think a lot about Sam. I mean, he's no longer with us, but um, he was one of the kind of first people that I interviewed and I interviewed him at great length. Uh, and I know you like a long interview, Lex. And, um, and I totally totally get that because when you have a when you have a long interview, you really start getting to the nuts and bolts of it. One of the frustrations for me when I'm looking at at oral histories of of Second World War vets is usually they're kind of, you know, they're put on YouTube or they're put on a museum website, they're 30 minutes, you know, an hour if you're lucky and there you're just scratching the surface. You never you never really get to know it and you feel that they're just repeating kind of stuff they've read in books themselves after the war and stuff. And you know, I was kind of leave feeling frustrated that that I haven't had a chance to kind of grill them on the kind of stuff that I would grill them on if I was put in front of them. So, Tank Man, what what was maybe the most epic, the most intense or the most interesting story that he told you? Well, I do remember him telling me uh funny enough, it's not really about about the conflict. I remember him telling me about the importance of letters. And there was this there was this guy who literally every few weeks, you know, post would arrive intermittently. There was no kind of sort of regular post. So it was supposed to be regular, but it it didn't come around regularly. So you might suddenly suddenly get a flurry of five all in one day. But he said it was this guy and um in his tank member of a different tank troop. It was a good friend of his in the in the same squadron. get British Huff Squadrons for for for their armor and uh which as Americans would have a company. I should say that in your book, one of the wonderful things you do is you use the correct term in the language. Yeah. For the particular army involved whether it's the German or the British or the American. Well, that's not to be pretentious. That's that's really just so it because you you're dealing with so many numbers and different units and it can go over your head and you can get sort of consumed by the detail if you're not careful. And as a reader, it can be very unsatisfying because you you just can't keep pace of everything. Um, so one of the things about writing in the vernacular German or or in the American spelling armore rather than ar maua as we would Brits would um spell it is it just immediately tells the reader, okay, this is American, okay, I've got that or this is German, I've got that or Italian or whatever it might be. But yeah, to go back to Sam. Sam, this there was this guy in in in his squadron and he'd get his letters from his from his girlfriend, his wife, and he said it was like it was like a soap opera. He he said we all just waited for his letters to come in so we could find out, you know, whether his, you know, his daughter had, you know, got to school, okay, or something, you know, won the swimming contest or whatever it was. You know, the sort of details of this sort of dayto-day kind of benile life was just absolute catnip to these guys. They absolutely loved it. And then the letter arrived, the Dear John letter, saying, "Sorry, I found someone else and and it's over." And his friend was just absolutely devastated. It was the only thing that was keeping him going. This sort of sense of this sort of continuity of of home, this sort of this this foundation of his life back at home. And Sam said he could see was in a really really bad way. Mhm. and he thought, uh, he's going to do something stupid. And he went up to him and he said, "Look, you know, I know it's bad and I know it's terrible and I know you're absolutely devastated, but you got your mates here. Just don't do anything silly. Just, you know, maybe, you know, when it's all over, you can patch things up or sort things out." And he said, you know, you got to understand it from her point of view. You know, it's a long way. You haven't seen you for 2 years. This kind of stuff, you know, so just just don't do anything rash. And of course, the next next engagement, two days later, he was killed. and he said it was just a kind of he could he just knew that was going to happen. He said it was a sort of self-fulfilling prophecy. That's something I've never forgotten that story. And I just thought, you know, it's about human drama. You know, that's that's that's the truth of it. And how people react to this totally alien situation. You know, for the most part, the Second World War is fought by ordinary everyday people doing extraordinary things. And I think that's something that's so fascinating. I suspect I I think I instinctively I'm quite slap dash I think. So I think I would have I'd have bought it literally. I don't think it would have ended well for me. I just I'm just a bit careless. Yeah. I think I also have an element in me where I can believe in the idea of nation and fight for a nation especially when the conflict is as grand. There are things worse than death. Yes. as as the propaganda would explain very clearly but also in reality. Yes. So a nation you know France, Britain was you know maybe facing the prospect of being essentially enslaved. The Soviet Union was facing the prospect of being enslaved literally. I mean it was very very clearly stated what they're going to do. They're going to repopulate the land with Germanic people. So well they're not just going to do that. They're also going to starve lots and lots of um Soviet individuals to death by the hunger plan, for example, which is planned, you know, really very casually and not by the, you know, this is not SS units or anything like this. This is the Vermach. This is the economic division of the Obert Commando de Vermac, the German combined general staff. General Gayorg Thomas comes up with you know and Herman Baka they come up with the uh who's the kind of minister for food they come up you know what are we going to do you know we haven't got enough food you know largely because German um farming is inefficient and they think well you know this is part of we'll go in and we'll take the food and there's been this colossal urbanization of the Soviet Union since the revolution in 1917 so they're just not going to get their food you know these these people in these cities cuz we're going to take it all and that's going to lead to that's going to lead to a lot of deaths. You know, teen millions is the phrase that Gail Thomas used. So, let's talk about the hunger plan. How important was the hunger plan and lab to Nazi ideology and to the whole Nazi war machine? It's central to the whole thing. This is all about this notion that is embedded into Hitler's mind and into the minds of the Nazi party right from the word go is there is a big sort of global conspiracy the Jewish bolevik plot I mean completely misplaced that Jews and Bolsheviks go hand in hand somehow dovetail they don't obviously and the whole ideology is to crush this you know part of the way the Nazis think the way Hitler thinks is there is them and there's us. We are the white northern European Aryans. We should be the master race. We've been we we've been threatened by a global Jewish bulvic plot. We've been stabbed in the back in 1918 at the end of the first world war. We need to have to overcome. This is an existential battle for future survival. It's a terrible task that has befallen our generation. But we have to do this. We have to overcome this or else we have no future. We will be crushed. It's absolutely cut and dry. And one of the things about Hitler is that he is a very kind of black and white them or us, either or kind of person. It's it's always one thing or the other. It's a thousand-y year Reich or it's Armageddon. There is no there's no middle ground. There's no gray area. It's just one or the other. And that's how that's his worldview. And the reason he came to the four was was because of the crystal clear clarity of his message which is we've been stabbed in the back. There is a global plot. We have to overcome this. We are naturally the master race. We have to reassert ourselves. We have to get rid of global jewelry. We have to get rid of global bulsheism. And we have to prevail or else. But if we do prevail, what an amazing world it's going to be. So, so he starts with this, you know, every speech he does always starts with the same way. Always starts from a kind of negative and always ends with an incredible positive, this sort of rabble rousing crescendo of of of if you're in the front row, spittle halattosis and justiculation. I mean, you've seen pictures of him. I mean, I don't know if you've ever seen, but he's he's he's almost he wants to grab the air and clutch it to him. um you know, you can see the kind of the venom coming out of his mouth just in a single still photograph. I mean, it it it's amazing. There's um apps you can get now where where you can translate his speeches, you know, just and it just sounds, you know, by today's standards, you would just think what a load of absolute wibble. I mean, just total nonsense. But but you have to kind of put yourself back in the shoes of people listening to him in 1922 or 23 or indeed 1933 and see how kind of captivating that is to a certain part of the part of the population. So yes so so the so to go back to your original point Libans is absolutely part of it. So what you do is you crush the bolevixs you crush world jewelry then you expand you know the Britain has had this incredible empire global empire you know Germany needs that too. Germanyy's stuck in Europe. It doesn't have access to the world's oceans. So, we're not going to be a maritime empire. We're going to be we're going to be a land mass empire, the whole of land mass of Europe and into Asia. That's going to be us. And we're going to take that land. We're going to take the the bread basket of of Ukraine. We're going to use that for our own own ends. We're going to spread our our uh we're going to make ourselves rich, but we're also going to spread our peoples. we're going to spread the Aryan northern master race throughout um throughout Europe and into the traditional Slavic areas and and we will prevail and come out on top. And so you have to understand that that that everything about Operation Barbarasa, the planned invasion of the Soviet Union in June 1941 is totally wrapped up in the Nazi ideology. And people, you know, I I' I've read it that historians go, if only Hitler had realized that, you know, the Ukrainians had been quite happy to kind of fight on his side. You know, if only he he'd actually brought some of these Jewish scientists and kind of into the Nazi fold, then Germany might have prevailed in World War II. And you kind of think, well, you're missing the entire point. That's just never going to happen because this is an ideological war. Yeah. This is not a pragmatic, rational leader. No, I mean part of his effectiveness, we should say, is probably this singular belief in this ideology. There's pros and cons for for an effective military machine, probably having that singular focus is effective. Yes. Except that when you're making military decisions, if those decisions are always being bracketed by an ideology which is fundamentally flawed from a pragmatic point of view as much as a kind of ethical, you know, a kind of reasonable point of view, um you're kind of opening yourselves up for for trouble. I mean, this is this is a problem he has with Barbara Rossa. you know, they they realize very early on in 1941 when they're when they're wargaming this whole operation that it's not going to work. And so, you know, there people like like General Pow who's on the uh general staff at the time, you know, he's he's given a kind of, you know, he's in charge of kind of wargaming this and he goes, "This isn't going to work." And Kitel, who is the uh chief of the OKW, goes, "No, no, no, no, no. Go back and make it work." He goes, "Okay." So he comes up with a plan that does work, but it's bogus. I mean, it's just it doesn't work because they don't have enough. They don't have enough motoriization. You know, they go into Barbar Ross with 2,000 different types of vehicle. You know, every single one of those vehicles has to have, you know, different distributor caps and different leads and plugs and all sorts of different parts. you know, there's the the interoperability of the of the German mechanized arm is super inefficient. And so you've got huge problems because they kind of think, well, you know, we we took France in 1940 and that's kind of one of the most modern countries in the world with, you know, one of the greatest armies and armed forces in the world and we did that in six weeks. So, you know, Soviet Union, look, they struggled against Finland for goodness sake. I mean, how hard can it be, you know, but what you're failing to understand is is that attacking the Soviet Union is over a geographical land mass 10 times the size of France just on the frontage and you haven't really got much more mechanization than you had in May 1940 when they attacked the low countries in France and you've actually got less Luftwaffer aircraft to support you and you just do not have the operational mechanics to make it work successfully. I mean, it is largely down to incompetence of the Red Army and the Soviet leadership in the summer of 1941 that they get as far as they do. I mean, you know, Barbarosa should never have come close to being a a victory. Let's talk through it. So, Operation Barbar Roa that you're mentioning, and we'll go back. Yes. We jump straight into it. I've I've eaten eaten off two years of war. So this is June 1941, Operation Barbar Roa, when Hitler invades the Soviet Union with I think the largest invading force in history up to that point collectively. Yeah. And there's three prongs. Army Group North, Army Group Center, Army Group South. North is going to Lennengrad. Center is going uh it's the strongest group going directly towards Moscow. And South is going and targeting Ukraine and the caucus. So can you linger on that on the details of this plan? What was the thinking? What was the strategy? What was the tactics? What was the logistics? Now we should there's so many things to say but one of them is to say that you often emphasize the importance of three ways to analyze military conflict of the strategic, the operational and the tactical. and operation of those is often not given enough time attention and it's the logistics that make the war machine really work successfully or fail. Yeah, that's absolutely um absolutely spot on. And it's interesting because the vast majority of uh general histories of World War II tend to focus on the strategic and the tactical. So what do I mean by that? world strategic just for the for those who don't know that's your overall war aims you know get to Moscow whatever it might be conquer the world that's your strategy the tactical side of things is that's the coalace of war that's the attritional bit that's the following his spitfire the tank crew the the soldier in his foxhole it's the actual kinetic fighting bit the operational bit is the level of war that that links the strategic to the tactical so it is absolutely factory ries, it's economics, it's shipping, it's supply chains, it's how you manage your war. And one of the things where I think people have been guilty in the past, historians have been guilty in the past is by judging warfare all on the same level. But obviously every competent nation has a different approach to war because of the nation they are, the size they are, their geographical location. So Britain for example is an island nation. Its priority is the Royal Navy, which is why the Royal Navy is known as the senior service. And you know, in 1939, it's easy to forget it now when you see how depleted Britain is today, but 1939, it has comfortably the world's largest um navy, something like 194 destroyers. Uh um I think it's 15 battleships, seven aircraft carriers, and another kind of six on the way. America, it's got Pacific Ocean, it's got the Atlantic Ocean, it's got two seabboards, you know, it has the second largest navy in the world, but a tiny army. I mean, the army, the US army in 19 September 1949 is the 19th largest in the in the world, sandwiched between Portugal and Uruguay. And it's just incredible. It's like 189,000 strong, which might seem reasonably large by today's standards, but is absolutely tiny by 1939 standards, you know. whereas you know Germany's got an army of you know 3 and a half million in 1939. So you know these are big big big differences but but America's coming at it from a different perspective. Britain's coming up about it from a different perspective. You know Britain's Britain's empire is all about you know it's it's a shipping it's a it's a it's a seaborn empire. Whereas there's also another point which which is having large armies is actually inherently impractical and inefficient because the larger army, the more people you got to feed, the more kind of barracks you've got to have, the more space you've got to have for training, the more people you're taking out of your workforce to produce tanks and shells and all the rest of it because they're tramping around with rifles, you know. So there's an argument saying saying actually it's really not not a very good way of doing things. So, you know, very much the uh the British way and and subsequently the United States way and way of Britain's dominions and and and empire is to use kind of steel, not our flesh as a as a principle. This is the idea is that you use technology, mechanization, modernity, global reach to do a lot of your hard yards. That's the sort of basic principle behind the the strategic air campaign. When we talk about the strategic air campaign, we're talking about strategic air forces which are operating in isolation from other armed forces. So a tactical air force, for example, is is an air force which is offering close air support for ground operations. A strategic air force has got nothing to do with ground operations. It's just operating on its own. So that's your bomber force or whatever, you know, that's your your your B7s and B244s of the Aair force flying out of East England bombing the rural industrial complex of Germany or whatever it might be. So it's important to understand that when you compare you have to have the back of your mind that Britain compared to Germany for example is coming at it from a completely different perspective. And I would say one of the failures of Hitler is that he always views everybody through his own very narrow worldview which is not particularly helpful. You know you want to get inside the head of your enemy and you know he's he's sort of guilty of not doing that. So when you're talking about operation Barbarasa to go back back to your original question next you're dealing with an operation on such a vast scale that that operational level of war is absolutely vital to its chances of success or failure. Doesn't matter how good your individual commanders are at the front. If you haven't got the backup it's not going to work. And the problem that the Germans have is yes, they've got their kind of, you know, three million men on the front and they've got their kind of, you know, 3,000 aircraft and and all the rest of it, but actually what you need to do is break it down and who is doing the hard yards of that and way the German war machine works is that the machine bit is only the spearhead. So people always talk about the Nazi war machine. In a way, it's a kind of misnomer because you're you're sort of suggesting that it's highly mechanized and industrialized and all the rest of it. And nothing could be further from the truth. The spearhead is, but the rest of it is not. And this is the kind of fatal flaw of of the German armed forces in in the whole of World War II really, but but even in this early stage because in Barbarasa you're talking about 17 Panza divisions out of you know 100 odd that are involved in the initial attack. Well 17 that a Panza division is not a division full of panzas tanks. It is a combined arms motorized outfit. So scouts on BMWs with side cars, uh um armored cars, infantry, grenaders, panzer grenaders, which are infantry in halftracks and trucks, mechanized, um it is motorized artillery, it is motorized anti-aircraft artillery. It is motorized anti-tank artillery. And of course, it is tanks as well, panzas. But those are a really really small proportion of you know you're talking less than 20% of your of your attacking force are those spearhead forces and inevitably they are going to be attritted as they go you know you are going to take casualties and not only that you're not going to just take battlefield casualties you're also going to have mechanical casualties because of the huge spaces involved you just simply can't function so what you see is in the initial phases of of operation Barbarasa they surge forward red army's absolutely no answers to anything. Stalin weirdly hasn't heeded the all the warnings that this this attack is brewing and there have been plenty incidentally halinsk falls on the 15th of July you know in less than four weeks it's just incredible three and a half weeks has gone you know they've done overwhelmed the rest of what had been Poland they surged into what is now barus taken all you know this is army group center uh army group north is thrust up into the into the Baltic it's all going swimmingly well but then the next several months They barely go 100 miles and that's because they're running out of steam. And and the 16th Panza division, for example, by the time it's taken Smealinsk involved in taking Smelinsk on the 15th of July 1941, the following day it's got 16 tanks left 16 out of you know should have 180. So it's just being a TR. They can't sustain it. and they can't sustain it because as the Russians fall back, as the Soviet Red Army falls back, they do their own scorched earth policy. They also discover that the railway line is kind of a different loading gauge. So, they've got to change it. So, it's slightly the Russian loading gauge is slightly wider. So, every single mile, every yard, every foot, every meter of that they're they're capturing of of Russian railway has to be moved a couple of inches to the left to make it fit the German criggs lock in the standard train of locomotive of the of the Reichkes bar. Just imagine what that's like. And also, Soviet trains are bigger, so they can take more water, which means the water stops in between are fewer and far between. So they have to the Germans when they come in their trains their creeks lock are smaller so they have to have be rewatered more often and recalled more often. So they have to I mean it's it's absolutely boggling just how complicated it is and how badly planned it is because they haven't reckoned on this. They're having to kind of think on their feet. I love the the logistical details of all this because yes that's a huge component of this especially when you cover that much territory. But there is a notion that if Hitler didn't stop uh army group center, it could have pushed all the way to Moscow. It was it was only maybe a 100 miles away from Moscow. Is that is that is that a possibility? Cuz it had so much success in the early days pushing forward. Do you think it's possible that if Hitler, as we mentioned from a military blunder perspective, didn't make that blunder that uh they could have defeated the Soviet Union right there and then. Well, my my own view is that they should never have got close. You Red Army has plenty of men to be able to see off anything that the the Germans can do. The capture of Keev, for example, in September 1941 was a catastrophe for for the Soviet Union and should never have happened. I mean, Zukov is saying to saying to Stalin, we got to pull back across the Denipo. St can't possibly do that. You can't abandon Kee. It's like third city in Soviet Union. No way. No, absolutely not. And he goes, well, we just we are just going to be overwhelmed. You know, we we can't hold this. and and he says, you know, either back me or or farm me. Back me or sack me. So Stalin sacks him. Uh uh yeah, obviously as we know, Zukov gets um rehabilitated in pretty quick order and Stalin does learn very quickly after thereafter to learn the lessons, but the opening phase of Bar Ross has been a catastrophe. And so as a consequence of Stalin refusing to let his men retreat back across the Dunipa, which is a substantial barrier and would have been very difficult for the Germans to overwhelm had they not had they moved back in time. Um, you know, that's another kind of 700,000 men put in the bag. I mean, that's just staggering numbers. Um, but yeah, I mean, there's so many things wrong with the Barbarasa plan. you know, too much over. It's just such a vast area. I mean, you're talking about kind of, you know, 2,500 miles or something, you know, of frontage, you know, maybe if you kind of put your your your Panza groups, which are these spearheads, and you put them all in one big frustr straight across on a kind of, you know, much more narrow front of, let's say, kind of 400 miles rather than 1,200, then they might have got, you know, they might have just sort of burnt away straight through to Moscow. They really caught the Red Army unprepared. Yeah. Is there um something to be said about the the strategic genius of that or was it just luck? No, I don't think so. I I mean I think think what's happened is you've had the you've had the the Soviet purges of the of the second half of the 1930s where they've you know they have executed or imprisoned 22 and a half thousand officers of which you know three out of five marshals um you know god knows how many army commanders um etc etc. So so you know you've completely decapitated the Red Army in terms of its command structure. So before that, would it be fair to say it was one of, if not the greatest army in the world? Well, there was a lot of experience. There's a lot of experience there that but also technology material. Yeah. The size of the army, the number of people that they're mobilized. Yeah. And they're the first people to kind of adapt, you know, create airborne troops, for example. So yes, I think there is an argument to say that. But the decapitation is is is absolutely brutal. If you've decapitated an army, you've then got to put new guys in charge. And someone who who looks on paper like a a halfdecent peace time commander might not be a very good wartime commander. They're different disciplines and different skills. And what comes to you don't know that until you're tested. It's very hard to kind of judge. And of course, you know, Stalin is existing in a sort of, you know, a vacuum of of paranoia and suspicion all the time, which is unhelpful when you're trying to develop a strong armed forces. So they go into Finland in in back end of 1939 and they get there, you know, they get really badly hammered. They do take about, you know, they get the Corellia um peninsula and they do take some ground, but at huge cost. I mean, the casualties are five times as bad as those of the Fins and it's a humiliation. So Hitler sees that and thinks, okay, we're not up to much cop. Then Hitler loses the battle of Britain and he thinks I can't afford to fight a war on two fronts. That's one of the reasons why Germany loses the war in 1914 to 18 is fighting on the eastern front but also fighting on, you know, the western front at the same time. We've got to avoid that. But I've got to get rid of Britain. And Britain hasn't come out of the fight. Britain is still fighting in the back end of 1940 having won the Battle of Britain. And so maybe I'll go into the Soviet Union now while the Red Army is still weak. You know, we're not 100% ready ourselves, but but let's hurry the whole thing forward because originally he'd been thinking of planning an operation in 1943 or 1944. So the idea is you take Poland out, you take out France and the low countries, you conquer most of Western Europe, you you knock out Britain. So therefore, you don't have to worry so much about the United States because they're over the other side of the Atlantic. That then gives it buys him the time to kind of rebuild up his strength for the allout thrust on the Soviet Union. The failure to subdue Britain in 1940 changes all those plans and makes him think actually I'm going to go in early. And he's also been kind of, you know, he's hoisted by Zopetard because he he starts to believe his own genius. You know, he everyone told him that, you know, he wouldn't be able to, you know, he wouldn't be able to beat France and the low countries. Everyone told him that, you know, it wouldn't work out when he went into Poland. Everyone was really nervous about it. You know, well, go hang you, you cautious, awful aristocratic Prussian generals. You know, I'm I'm the best at this. I've told you. I've shown you. I'm the genius. Um, I can do it. He starts to believe his own hype. And of course, this is a problem. you know, he's surrounded by sick of fans and people who constantly telling him this he's this incredible genius. So, he starts to believe it and he thinks everything is possible and and he's very much into this idea of of the will of the German people. You know, this is our destiny and either will, as I say earlier on, you know, it's the thousand-y year Reich of Armageddon, but momentum is with us and we need to strike it and only by by gambling, only by being bold will will the Germans prevail and all this kind of nonsense. And so that's why he goes into into Soviet Union in June 1941 rather than you know a couple of or even three years later. Yeah. He really hated the Prussian generals. Huh. Yeah. He hated them. Is there a case to be made that there he was indeed at times a military genius? No, I don't think so. Cuz none of the plan I mean even the plan for the invasion of France and the low countries isn't his. It's a the the concept is is von Mannstein's and the execution is Gerian Hines Gadderian. So heiscoded is is a kind of he's the pioneer of of of the panza force the panzer thrust this idea of the ultra mechanized combined arms panzer arm spearhead doing this kind of lightning fast thrust um it's not Hiller's idea he adopts it and and takes it as his own because you know he's a fury he can do what he likes um but but it isn't his so it's not you know and up until that point until that comes into being till that that plan is put forward to France Halder who is the chief of staff of the German army at that time you know how is just thinking how do we get out of this mess this is just a nightmare because they know that France has got a larger army they know that France has got more tanks and know that France has got double the number of artillery pieces it's got par in terms of air forces then you add Holland then you add Belgium then you add Great Britain and that looks like a very very tough nut to crack I mean the reason why France is subdued in 1940 is 50% brilliance of the Germans and their operational art in that particular instance and 50% French failure really and incompetence. I mean there is a kind of genius to be able to see and take advantage and set up the world stage in such a way that you have the appeasement from France and Britain. Keep the United States out of it. just set up the world stage where you could just plow through everybody with no with very little resistance. I mean there is a kind of well yes if geopolitical genius if it works but it doesn't you know that's that's a problem. I mean you know I mean he goes into Poland on the assumption that Britain and France will not declare war. You know he he he is not prepared for Britain and France declaring war on Germany. Right. He thinks they won't. That's right. So miscalculation blunder. But then France does, right? And then that doesn't, you know, France does not successfully do anything with this incredible army that it has. It has a size, but one of the problems that France has is that it's very very topheavy. It's it's very cumbersome in the way it operates. Um there's no question that that it's got some brilliant young commanders, but but at the lot the top the commanders are very old. Most of them are first world war veterans, you know, whether you I mean Vegan Gamlan, General George. Um these people, they're all well into their 60s. Um General George is the youngest army commander and he's 60. You know, it's too old to be an army commander. You need to be in your kind of late 40s, early 50s. And they're too just consumed by conservatism and the old ways. And what what they assume is that any future war will be much like the first world war. It'll be attritional, long and drawn out, but static. But actually, they're right on two parts of it. It is, as it turns out, it is going to be long and drawn out and attritional, but it's going to be mobile rather than static. And that's a big miscalculation. So, here's here's my question. I think you're you're being too nice on France here. So when when when Germany invaded Poland, it correct me if I'm wrong, but it feels like France could have just went straight to Berlin. Yeah, they absolutely could have and they and I know you said it's very topheavy and you're saying all of these things, but they literally did basically nothing. Yeah, they were pulling. So like that uh and I think a part of that and I think you described as well maybe you can speak to that is the insanity that is Hitler creating this psycholog with the propaganda creating this feeling that there's this Nazi force that's unstoppable. So they're they're France just didn't want to like step into that. Maybe they were like legitimately I I I hesitate to say these words, but scared of war. 100% they are. That, you know, because France has been totally traumatized by the First World War. It's fought on their land. It's fought in their industrial heartland. You know, they lose three times the amount of people killed that that Britain does. Britain's traumatized by it, but but but not to the same degree that France is. France, you know, there is just no stomach to do that again. And so that makes them risk averse. And by being riskaverse, you're actually taking a far greater risk. That that that that's the irony of it. And the truth is also there isn't the political will. And a a successful military can only be successful if there is a political will at the top. And the problem with France in the 1930s is it's very politically divided. It's uh it's it's a time of multiple governments, multiple prime ministers, um uh coalition governments really extreme coalition governments from the sort of drawn from the left and the right as well as the center and you know this is not a coalition of of two parties. This is a coalition of multiple parties and no one can ever agree anything. I mean that's the problem. It's amazing that the MNO line is even agreed you know this incredibly strong defensive position down the western side of France of border with um with Germany which is kind of largely impregnable but the problem is the bit that's not impregnable which is the hinge where the Mno line ends and it sort of basically starts turning kind of towards in a kind of north noy direction and the border with Belgium and you know what they should have done is built kind of border defenses all along the northern coast with Belgium cuz Belgium refused used to kind of uh allow any Allied troops into into his territory. It was neutral. And France should have said, "Okay, fine. Well, then we'll defend our, you know, we're not going to come to your rescue if you get invaded. That's your that's your what that that's that's the payoff." And and a consequence of that, we are going to stockpile everything that we're not going to be drawn into the neutral territory should Germany invade from the West. But they don't do that because of the psychological damage of having fought a war in exactly that area a generation earlier. And and that's the problem. So when the you know there is Germany is so weakened by the invasion of Poland there is literally nothing left. You know the back door from into western Germany is completely open. And so they do what they call the SAR offensive but it's not. It's a kind of reconnaissance in force where they kind of go across the border, kind of pick their noses for for a few days and then kind of trundle back again. And it's just it's embarrassing. And and that is what you're seeing there is is a nation which is just not ready for this, which is scared, which is politically divided, which is then having a knock-on effect on on the decision-m process, and which is just consumed by military complacency. And that's the big problem. There is this, you know, the the commanders at the very top of the French regime are are complacent. They they they haven't bought into kind of modern ways. They haven't looked at how contemporary technology could help them. I mean it is absurd for example that there isn't a single radio in the chat Devalsen which is you know the headquarters of the commander-in-chief of the French armed forces which is General Marshall Morris Gamalan I mean it's just unbelievable but but that is the case and and there's no getting away from that and and it is all the more ironic when you consider that France is actually the most automotive society in Europe it's the second most automotive society in the world after the United States by some margin it has to be said as well you know has a fantastic transportation system railway network is superb it's it it there are there are eight people for every motorized vehicle in France which is way above Germany which is in 1949 that figure is 47 for example it's 106 in Italy so France is very mechanized like very mechanized so come on guys put your finger out get it together and they just don't they're they're incredibly slow and cumbersome and what they think is when what will happen is the Germans won't think of going, you know, they won't do a pinser movement because you can't possibly take motorized forces through through the Arden. That just is not possible, which is the hinge area between the end of the Majinow, the northern part of the Majino line, which runs down the western, sorry, the eastern border of of France and and the northern bit. And so what we'll do with that hinge around the town of Sedan, we'll we'll move into into Belgium. We'll meet the Germans before they get anywhere near France. we'll hold them and while we're holding them, we will bring up our reserves and then we'll we'll counterattack and crush them. That that's the idea behind it. But the problem is is they don't have a means of moving fast and their communication systems are dreadful. Absolutely dreadful. They're dependent on conventional telephone lines which you know dive bombers and whatever are just kind of absolutely wrecking. Suddenly the streets are clogged with refugees and people can't move. So they're then you know telephone lines are down. There's no radios. So, you're then dependent on sending dispatch riders on little motorbikes. You know, General uh Morris Gamalan sends out a a dispatch rider at 6:00 in the morning. Um by 12:00 he hasn't come back. So, you then send another one. Finally, the answer comes back kind of 9:00 at night, by which time the kind of Germans advance another 15 miles and the original message that you sent at 6:00 that morning is completely redundant and has passed it sell by date. And that's happening at every step of the way, you know. So you've got you've got overall commander um headquarters, then you've got army group, then you've got army, then you've got core, then you've got division. So the consequence of all that is that French just can't move. They're just stuck. They're they're rabbits in headlights and the Germans are able to kind of move them uh destroy them in isolation. Meanwhile, they're able to use their excellent communications um to very very good effect. And you were talking about the genius of of war. It's not Hitler that's a genius. If anyone's a genius, it's Gerbles, the propaganda chief. And it is their ability to harness that they are the kings of messaging. You know, they don't have they don't have X, they don't have social media. Um, but they do have new technology. And that new technology, that new approach is flooding the airwaves with their singular message, which is always the same and has been ever since the Nazis come into power. And it is using radios. And I think radios are really really key to the whole story because there is no denser radio network anywhere in the world including the United States than Germany in 1939. So while it's really behind the times in terms of mechanization, it is absolutely on top of its game in terms of coms. So 70% of households in Germany have radios by 1939 which is an unprecedented number that that is only beaten by United States and only just. So it is it is greater than any other other nation in Europe. And in terms of flooding the airwaves, it is the densest because even for those who the 30% who don't have radios, that's not a problem because we'll put them in the stairwells of apartment blocks. We'll put them in squares. We'll put them in cafes and bars. And the same stuff the state the the the Nazi state controls the radio airwaves as it does the movies as it does newspapers. All aspects of the media are controlled by by Gerbles and the propaganda ministry and they are putting out the same message over and over again. It's not it's not all Hitler's ranting. It's entertainment, light entertainment, some humorous shows. Um it is also Vagner of course and Richard Strauss. Um it it's it's a mixture but the subliminal message is the same. We're the best. We're the top dogs. Jewish Bolevik plot is awful. That needs to be, you know, that's the existential threat to us. We have to overcome that. We're the top dogs militarily. We're the best. We should feel really good about ourselves. We're going to absolutely win and be the greatest nation in the world ever. And Hitler's a genius. And and that is just repeated over and over and over and over again. And the, you know, for all the modernity of the world in which we live in today, most people believe what they're told repeatedly. Yeah. They still do. If you just repeat repeat repeat over and over again, people will believe it. You know, if you're a if you're a diehard Trump supporter, you you want to believe that and you'll believe everything he says. If you are a diehard Bernie Sanders man, you know, you're from the left, you'll believe everything he says because it's reinforcing what you already want to what what you already want to believe. But the scary thing is uh you know radio is the technology of the day. The technology of the day today which is a terrifying one for me is uh um I would say AI on social media. So bots you can have basically bot farms which I assume is used by Ukraine, by Russia, by US I I would love to read the history written about this era about the information wars. Who has the biggest bot farms? Who has the biggest propaganda machines? And when I say bot, I mean both automated AI bots and humans operating large number of smartphones with SIM cards that are just able to boost messages enough to where they become viral and then real humans with real opinions get excited. Also, it's like this vicious cycle. So if you support your nation, all you need is a little boost and then everybody gets real excited and then now you're chanting and now you're in this mass hysteria and now it's the 1984 2 minutes of hate and the message is clear. I mean that's what propaganda does is it really clarifies the mind and that is exactly what what Hitler and the Nazis and Gerbles are doing in the 1930s. Well, they're doing in the 1920s as well, but more effectively once they come into power, of course. And Hitler is so fortunate that he comes he takes over the chancellorship in January 1943 at a time where the economy is just starting to turn and he's able to make the most of that. And you know if you're Germans and you've been through hyperinflation in the early 1920s, you've been through the humiliation of Versail treaty which was terrible error in in retrospect and you've been through then having got through that you've emerged into a kind of democratic VHimar Republic which is based on manufacturing you know Germany's traditional genius at engineering and manufacturing and production of of high quality um items. they're merging through that. Then you have the Wall Street crash and the loans that are coming in from America, which is propping up the entire German economy, suddenly get cut off and you've suddenly got depression again and and massive unemployment. And suddenly Hitler comes in and everyone's got jobs and they're rebuilding and they're growing their military and the message that's coming out is we're the greatest, we're the best, we're fantastic. You know, I was telling you earlier on about about pillar speeches starting with the dark, starting dark and ending in in hope and light and the sunlit uplands. You know, that's what you're getting. You're suddenly getting this vision of hope. This sort of, you know, by God, actually, this is really working. You know, okay, so, you know, I'm not sure that I particularly buy into the kind of anti-semitic thing, but, you know, we'll sweep that under the carpet because overall, I've now got a job, I've got money, I've got my new radio, you know, and then this is the genius about the radios, for example. So they have the uh they have the the German receiver to start off with the the Deutsche Fanger and then they have the the Deutsche Klein and Fanger which is the German little receiver little radio. These are genius. This is this is as outrageous as the arrival of the iPod. I mean remember that you know suddenly you don't have to have a Sony Walkman anymore. You can have something really really small and miniature and listen to thousands and thousands and thousands of songs all at once. What a what an amazing thing. And the Deutsche Klein Fanger is 9 in x 4 in x 4 in. It's made of bake light and everyone can have one cuz it's super cheap. It's just incredible. And no one else said that because up until that point, radios generally speaking are aspirational. You know, they've got sort of walnut lacquer at the front and you know, you have them if you're middle class and you show them off to your neighbors to show how kind of, you know, affluent and wellto-do you are. Um but suddenly everyone can have one and if everyone can have one then everyone can receive the same message and you can and you can also this is the whole point about the Hitler youth as well you know the young guys that's where they're they're most impressionistic they're they're least risk averse so they're most gung-ho they're they're most full of excitement for the possibilities of life and they're also their minds are the most open to suggestion so you get the youth you hang on you get them and so a whole generation of young men are brought up thinking about the genius of Hitler and how he's delivering us this much better nation and returning our um over overhauling the humiliations of the first world war where overcoming the back the stab in the back that happened in 1918 etc etc and you know as a young 16year-old German you're thinking yeah I want a piece of that and and hey guess what they got really cool uniforms and and you know come and join the SS and you know get the throw line what's not to like you You know, you can see why why it it's so clever. And what's so interesting is propaganda today is is still using those those tenets that Gerbles was using back in the 1930s. And this is why I was say say that, you know, history doesn't repeat itself. Of course, it doesn't. It it can't possibly repeat itself because we're always living in a a constantly evolving time. But patterns of human behavior do. And what you always get after economic crisis is political upheaval. Always, always, always. because some people are in a worse off position than they were financially before. They're thinking h well, you know, the current system doesn't work. What's the alternative? So, you know, in the case of of now, we in the west, you know, we face, first of all, we faced the crisis of 2008, financial crisis 2008. Then we've had the kind of double whammy of COVID and that has been incredibly unsettling. And so, we're now in a a situation of of political turmoil. And whether you're whether you're whether you're proTrump or anti-Trump, what he's offering is something completely different. And you know, it's say, you know, he he's saying the old ways don't work. You know, I'm going to be I'm just going to say what I think. I'm just going to I'm going to come out. I'm not going to bother with all the sheen of diplomacy and kind of, you know, meymouth words that politicians always use, you know, which where you can't trust anyone. I'm just going to tell you as it is. And obviously people respond to that. You know, you you can understand why that has a has an appeal. And if the country already feels broken and here's someone who is going to be a disruptor and going to change the the way you go about things, you can see why a a reasonably large proportion of the population is going to go, I'll have a piece of that. Thank you very much. And especially uh when the country is in a economic crisis like Germany was, I think you've written that the the Treaty of Versailles created Hitler and the uh the Wall Street crash and the great depression brought him to power. Yes. And of course the propaganda machine that you describe is the thing that got everybody else in Germany on board. Yeah. It's it's it's amazing how he cuz he comes in with 33% of the vote. He had 37% of the vote of the vote in July 1942. So again, this is another period of of turmoil just like it is in France where you're having constant different kind of coalitions and you know different chancellors leaders of Germany. So, it's very possible he he he wouldn't have come to power. Well, he said he he said, "I will only, you know, we will only take our seats if if if I can be chanced. Otherwise, forget it. I'm not coming into any coalition." So, then the uh the government falls again in January 1943. They have the they have the election. The Nazi vote is down from where it was the previous summer. But this time, they go, "Okay, Heather can be chancellor, but we'll manipulate him." how wrong they were. You know, he's manipulating everyone and then Hinderberg who is the president dies the following summer and uh he's able to get rid of the presidency. There is no more president of Germany. There is just the furer him and he gets rid of uh he has a enabling act which is where all other uh political parties have disbanded and suddenly you've got a total inherent state just like that. I think there's a lesson there. Uh there's many lessons there, but one of them is don't let an extremist into government. Yes. And assume you can control them. Yes. The arrogance of the existing politicians who just completely screwed it up. I mean, there is a real power to an extremist. Like there's uh a person who sees the world in in black and white can really gain the attention and the support of the populace. Yes, especially when there's a resentment about like Treaty of Versailles, when there's economic hardship and if there's effective modern technology that allows you to do propaganda and sell the message. There's something really compelling about the black and white message. It is because it's simple and and what Hitler does throughout the 1920s is he sticks to this there there is actually when he comes out of prison in so he there's the bhole p in November 1923 he gets uh charged with treason which he has been because he's attempting a coup and he gets sentenced to 5 years which is pretty lenient for what he's done and he then gets let out after 9 months. The Nazi party is is is is banned at that point, but then comes back into being. And the year that follows, there is then a substantial debate about where the party should go. And there are actually a large number of people who think that actually they should be looking at how the Soviets are doing things and taking some of the some of the things that they consider to be positive out of the communist state and applying those to the Nazis. and Hitler goes, "No, no, no, no, no, no. We we we've just got to stick to this kind of Jewish bosshit thing. This is this is how we're going to do it. This we're going to do it." Gerbles, for example, who is who is very open. He's he's very very Joseph Gerbles is a he's a he's a not very successful um journalist. He is uh but he does have a PhD in German literature. He's very disaffected because he was born with talipes, which is, you know, more commonly known as a club foot. He's disabled. can't fight in the First World War. He's very frustrated by that. He's in a deep despair about about the state of Germany in the first part of the early 1920s. He's looking for a uh um a a political messiah as a sort of quai religious messiah. Thinks it's Hitler, then discovers that Hitler's not open to any ideas at all uh about any deviation, but then sees the light. Hitler recognizes that this guy is someone that he wants on his side. And so then goes to him, makes a real special effort. Come on, come to dinner. I think you're great. You know, all this kind of stuff. Wins him about over and girls has this complete vault fast. Discards his earlier kind of yeah, you know, Hitler's right. I was wrong. Hitler is the kind of messiah figure that that I want to follow. I want to follow the hero hero leader. And they come on board and they absolutely work out. Hitler completely wins out. All dissenters within the what had been the German Workers Party drop becomes the German National Socialist Party becomes the Nazis. Um he comes out emerges as the absolute undisputed furer of that leader of that that party and what he says goes and everyone toes him behind it and part of the genius of that you know Hitler does have some genius. I just don't think it's military, but he does have some genius. There's no question about it. Is this the simplicity of message what he's doing is it's that kind of us and them thing that we were talking about earlier on. It's the kind of either or. It's kind of it's my way or the highway. It's kind of this is the only way. This is how we get to the sunlet uplands. This is how we we create this amazing master race of the this unification of German peoples which dominates the world which is the preeminent power in the world for the next thousand years or it's decay and despair and being crushed by our enemies and our enemies are the Jews and and the bolevixs the communists and what he taps into as well is front ginehaft and vultmine shaft And these are there's no direct English translation of Volska shaft or indeed France shaft but but but in its most basic form it's community it's people community or front veterans community. So the front mine shaft is we are the guys we're bonded because we were in the trenches you know we were in the first world war. We were the people who bravely stuck it out saw our friends being slaughtered and blown to pieces. We we did our duty as proud Germans, but we were let down by the elites and we were let down by the by this Jewish Bolevik plot. You know, we were stabbed in the back. The myth of the stab stabbing in the back is very very strong. So, we're bound we're bonded by our experiences of the First World War and the fact that we did what we should and what we could and we were we didn't fail in what we were doing. we were failed by our leaders um and by the elites. So that's that's front commine shaft. Volkine shaft is this sense of national unity. It's it's it's a cultural ethnic bonding of people who speak German who have a have a similar outlook on life. And again that just reinforces the us and them good and evil. It reinforces the black and white worldview. And then you add that to this very simple message which Hitler is repeating over and over again. Communists are a big threat. Jews are a big threat. They're the they're the enemy. You have to have a you have to have an opposition in the them and us kind of process. And that's what he's doing. And and people just buy into it. They go, "Yeah, we're together. We're Germans. We're, you know, we're a brotherhood. we've got our Volskar mine shaft and so he cleverly ties into that and taps into that but they're an irrelevance by the late 1920s you know by 1928 you know the the he's not going to get a deal for Mine Camp part two you know he he's he's he's impoverished the party's impoverished you know numbers are down there they're a kind of you know a best and and a relevance we should say he wrote minecom at this time when he was in prison he writes he writes most of mine in prison in Lansburg prison And then he writes the rest of it in what becomes known as the campfousel which is this little wooden hut in the in the Oberalssburg and you can still see the remnants of that and unfortunately there's still little candles there and stuff in the woods and you know by by neo-Nazis and what what have you but that's where he wrote wrote the rest of it. Um I mean it was John Jacqu Russo who says man has his greatest force when surrounded by nature. That was something that kind of Hitler took very much to heart. Um there was a there was a mentor of his called Dietrich Echart. Dri Echart introduced him to the Obisalsburg and the beauty of the southwest southeast Bavarian Alps around Burkis Garden and um and that was his favorite place on the planet and um that's where he that's where he eventually bought the um the uh the Burhoff with the royalties it has to be said from Mine Camp which went from being you know almost pulp to suddenly being a runaway bestseller unfortunately. Can you actually comment on that? It's a shitty manifesto as far as manifestos goes. I think there's a lot of values to understand from a first-person perspective the words of a dictator of a person like Hitler, but it just feels like that's just such a shitty Yeah. I mean, you know, it's banned in a number of countries. You don't need to cuz no one's going to read it because it's unreadable, you know. Um I mean, it's it's very untidy. It's it's very incoherent. It's it's got no um there's no narrative arc to use a kind of, you know, a writer's phrase. I mean it's just it's but but but it does give you a very clear you know the overall impression you get at the end of it is is the kind of communists and the Jews are to blame for everything. Yeah. But there's also the component of you know predicting basically World War II there. So it's not just they're to blame. He's he's hungry for war. He he thinks that this is this is the natural state that we have to have this terrible conflict and once the conflict's over Germany will emerge victorious and then there will be the thousand-y year Reich. I mean you I I'm finding myself in in talking to you. I keep saying this kind of, you know, it's Armageddon all the thousand year, right? It's because it comes up. It's it's it's unavoidable because that's how he's speaking the whole time. It's just this same message over and over and over and over again. It's a pretty unique way of speaking, sort of allowing uh violence as a tool in this picture that there's a hierarchy, that there's a superior race and inferior races, and it's okay to destroy the inferior ones. Yeah, usually politicians don't speak that way. They just say, "Well, here's good and evil. We're the good guys." And yeah, maybe we'll destroy the evil a little bit. No, here is like there's a complete certainty about a very large number of people, the Slavic people, they just need to be removed. Well, they need to be made an irrelevance. You know, we have to take it we have to take it and if that if that kills millions of them, fine. Then then they can sort of squish their way over to Siberia. It doesn't matter where they go or whatever they go. I don't care. We just need to populate this land that belongs to the German people. Yeah. Cuz they're the superior people. There's no question that he glorifies violence and war. You know, he's absolutely chomping at the bit. And in a way, I think he's a bit disappointed that that in the 1930s the the conquests that he does undertake are also peaceful. You know, March 1948 goes straight into Austria. There's the Angelus. You know, not a shot is fired. You know, 1946 goes into Rhineland. reconquers that, retakes that over that from from uh from the occupying allies, not a shot is fired. You know, he takes the Sudan land, not a shot, barely a shot is fired. Um and then goes into into the rest of Czechosvaka in March 193039 and again, barely a shot is fired. And you know, it's a bit disappointing. You know, he wants to be wants to wants to be tested. He wants to kind of have the have the the wartime triumph. You could see him being frustrated about this in in the Munich crisis in 1948. He wants to fight. He's absolutely spoiling for it. He's desperate to go in. He's all ready and gung-ho. He's built his luftwaffer. He's he's got his his his panzas now. He's got his his his massive armed forces. You know, he wants to test them. He wants to wants to get this show on the road and prove it. You know, he is a he's an arch gambler. Hiller, you you make it seem so clear. But uh all the while to the rest of the world, to Chamberlain, to France, to Britain, to the rest of the world, he's saying he doesn't want that. He's making agreements. Everything you just mentioned, you just went through it so quickly. But those are agreements that were made that he's not going to do that. Uh and he does it over and over. He violates the Treaty of Versailles. He violates every single treaty, but he still is doing the meeting. So may maybe can you go through it the leadup to the war 1939 September 1st like what are the different agreements what is the signaling he's doing what is he doing secretly in terms of building up the military force yes so he you know part of the treaty of size you're not you know you're allowed a very very limited um uh armed forces there's restrictions on naval expansion there's restrictions on the size of the army there's restrictions on the weapons you you can use. There are um you're not allowed an air force. But he starts doing this all clandestinely. Um you know there are people in um crop has got for example which is in the rur a sort of big um armous manufacturer they are producing tanks in elsewhere and parts elsewhere in in say the Netherlands for example and then shipping them back into back into Germany. They're doing Panza training exercises actually in the Soviet Union at this time. There's all sorts of things going on. The Luftwaffer is being announced to the world in 1935, but it's obviously been in the process of of developing long before that. The Meshmit 109 single engine fighter plane, for example, is created in 1934. So that they're doing all these things against it. And and the and the truth is is he's just constantly pushing what what can I get away with here? what what what will pro you know and and of course Britain, France, the rest of rest of the world, rest of the allies, you know, they're all reeling from from the Wall Street crash and and the depression as well. So, have they got the stomach for this? Not really. You know, and perhaps actually on reflection the terms of Versail are a bit harsh anyway. So, you know, maybe we don't need to worry about it. And this just no political will. There's no political will to kind of fight against what Germany's doing. Then he gets away of it. So he suddenly starts realizing that that that that actually he can push this quite a long way because no one's going to stand up to him which is why he makes a decision in 1946 to go back into the you know into the rhin land you know which has been occupied by by French you know um um allied troops at that point he just walks in do your worst and no one's going to do anything cuz there isn't the stomach to do anything that was a big step in 1936 remilitarizing the Ryland I mean that that's a huge huge step of like, oh, I don't have to follow anybody's rules and they're gonna do nothing. And and he's looking at his military and he's and and he's also looking at response. So, one of the things they do is they, you know, it's really it's very clever. So, they get over the head of the uh army of the air, army dea, which is the um French air force, and they invite him over and they milk, who is the uh second command of the Luftwaffer, invites him over. So, come and see what we're what we're up to. you know, we want to be, you're our European neighbors. We're all friends together, this kind of stuff. Come and see what we've got. And he takes him to this airfield. There's a row of measures 109's all lined up, like sort of 50 of them. And the the head of the army of the air sort of looks at him and goes, "G, that's impressive." And and Mil goes, "Well, let me go and take you to another airfield." And they they go off the sort of the bat route out of the airfield and a long securitous route in the Mercedes. Meanwhile, all the measurements take off from that airfield, going to land in the next airfield. Here's another. and they're all the same aircraft and the commander and chief of the army of the aircraft goes back to France and goes we're never going to be able to eat Germany. So you would earlier you were you were alluding to this earlier on you know how much is this sort of this this this just this hutzbar of this ability to kind of portray the the the the mechanized mollock. Um yeah it absolutely cows the enemy. So, so they're they're they're increasing the effectiveness of their armed forces purely by propaganda and by by mind games and by talking the talk. And you know, you look at we might all think these military parades that the Nazis have looked rather silly by today's standards, but you look what that looks like if you're the rest of the world. You're in Britain and you're still reading from the depression and you see the triumph of the will. You see some of that footage and you see these automatons in their steel helmets and you see the swastikers and you see hundreds of thousands of people all lined up and see Kyling and all the rest of it. You're going to think again before you go to war with people like that. It's also hard to put yourself in the in the mind of those leaders now now that we have nuclear weapons. So nuclear weapons have created this kind of uh cloak of a kind of safety from mutually assured destruction. They that you think surely you will not do you know a million or two million uh soldier army invading another land, right? Just fullon gigantic hot war. Uh but at that time that's the real possibility. you you remember World War I. You remember all of that. So, you know, yeah, okay, there's a mad uh guy with a mustache. Uh he's making statements that this land belongs to Germany anyway cuz it's mostly German uh populated. So, and like you said, treaty versile wasn't really fair. And you can start justifying all kinds of things yourself. And maybe they got a point about the dancing corridor. You know, they are mainly Germans, German speaking people there. And you know, it's disconnected from East Prussia, which is just saying, you know, I can I I sort of get it, you know, maybe they've got a point, you know, and is Poland really a kind of thriving democracy anyway? Not really. By 1930, late 1930s, it's not. It's to all intents and purposes a dictatorship in Poland at that time. I mean, it it's not right that you just go and take someone else's country. Of course, you you can't do that. But but you can see why in Germany people are thinking they've got a point. You can also see why in France and Britain, they're thinking, well, you know, do we really care about the polls? I mean, you know, is it worth going to to war over? Um, but there's kind of bigger things at play by this point. That that's the point. Yeah. But before we get to Poland, there is this meeting September 1938. Uh, so Chamberlain made three trips to meet with Hitler. Yeah. Uh, which culminated in the Munich conference. Yeah. On the 30th of September. Yeah. Where was Chamberlain, Hitler, Mussolini and Delej, prime minister of France. They met to discuss a century Czechoslovakia without any of the government officials of Czechoslovakia participating. And Hitler promised to make no more territorial conquest. And Chamberlain believed him. He chose to believe him, I think, is the thing is the point. So, so it's very interesting. So, so Chamberlain gets a very bad press. Um. Uh-oh. Well, no, I'm not. No, it's not really. Uh oh. It's it's it's I I I just think there's too much retrospective view on this. And and that's fine because we the whole point of history is you can look back and you can judge decisions that were made at a certain point through the prism of what subsequently happened, which of course the people that are making the decisions at the time can't because they're in that particular moment. So I don't think Chamberlain did trust Hitler, but he wanted to give him the benefit of the doubt. Britain was not obliged to Czechoslovakia at all. France was. France had signed a treaty with with Czechoslovakia in 1924, but but but Britain had not. So there was no obligation at all for Britain to do this. The only reason why Britain would go to war over Czechoslovakia is because of the threat of Nazism and what the ramifications of not going to war with him. But the problem is is that Chamberlain's interesting because in 1935 he was he was chances checker and when they started to sort of think okay we really do need to rearm um he was very much in favor of of substantially um expanding and rehabilitating the navy so updating existing battleships um and so on and also developing the air force. Mhm. There's not really much argument for having a large army because if you have a large army, you've got to maintain it. Britain is a small place. Where do you put them? You've also got to transport them. That's complicated. Um, you've got to train them. You got to embarrass. You got to feed them. All this kind of stuff. It's there's a kind of sort of impracticality about having a large army. Whereas navies are great because you can keep them at sea and they can be, you know, on the water. Air Force is slightly different. Air power is viewed in very much the same way that that naval power is viewed. that this is we're an island nation. We have a global global assets and airpower gives us a flexibility that an army doesn't. So he is all for backing the expansion of the of the army of the air force and the navy in 1930s. Then he subsequently becomes prime minister and sticks his guns on that. It is he that enables the air force and and the air ministry to develop the first fully coordinated air defense system anywhere in the world. There is not an air event system in Poland, nor Norway, nor Denmark, nor the Netherlands, nor Belgium, nor France. There is in Britain. Britain is the only one. And frankly, it pays off big time in the summer of 1940. So you have to give him credit for that. Britain intro, interestingly, is also the world's leading armaments exporter in the 1930s, which is amazing really when you think everyone complains about the fact that we weren't rearming enough. actually we were when we had all the infrastructure there and and we were expanding that infrastructure dramatically. I say we I'm only saying that because I'm British. Uh um so they were doing that but in 1938 Britain wasn't ready for war. Now you can argue that Germany wasn't ready for war either. But Chamberlain was prime minister in a democracy, a parliamentary democracy where 92% of the population were against going to war in 1938. There is there is not a single democratic leader in the world that would go against the wishes of 92% of the population. Now you could say well he should have just argued it better and presented his case better and all the rest of it but at that point there was no legal obligation to go to the defense of Czechoslovakia. You know Czechoslovakia been was a number of these new nations have been created out of out of 1919 in the Versail treaty. You know, who was to say, you know, we in Britain are able to judge the rights and wrongs of that. You know, how fantastic it would be to go to war with uh a nation a long way away for people whom we know very little, etc., etc. I'm paraphrasing his quote, but but I'm not saying it was the right decision. I'm just saying I can see why in September 1948, he is prepared to give him the chance. Now I do think he was a bit naive and it and and what he also does is this really interesting thing is he goes over to Hitler's flat completely ambushes him goes to his flat on the afternoon of 30th September and says to says to Hitler look I've got this I've drawn up this this agreement here um and this is to continue the um the naval agreement that we've already made and and by signing this you are saying that Germany and Britain should never go to war with one another and it goes yeah whatever you know signs it. Yeah. Chamberlain comes back, lands a hand and waves his waves his little piece of paper, you know, peace in our time and all the rest of it, which obviously comes back to bite him in a very big way. But it's interesting that that that when Hitler then subsequently goes and moves in, you know, that they France and Britain decide in rather the same way that there's been discussion about deciding that large portions of Ukraine should just be handed back to handed over to Russia without consulting Ukraine a few weeks ago. Um it is incredible I think that that France and and Britain and Italy with Germany are deciding that yes it's fine for Germany to go in and take the Sudatan land you know without really consulting the checks. It's a sort of similar kind of scenario really and and it's equally wrong. Um, but when Germany does then go and take over the whole of Czechoslovakia in March 1939, that is that's the bottom line. That is that's the point where Chamberlain goes, "Okay, I've given him the benefit of the doubt. No more benefits of doubt. That's it. That is he's he's crossed the line." And so you reinforce your agreement with Poland. You do a formal agreement. You go, "Okay, we will uphold your sovereignty. You know, if you are invaded, we will go to war with you." You know, and that is that is a a ratcheting up of diplomacy and politics in a very very big way. And it is a it is that decision to make a a treaty with the Poles is not heeded by Hitler, but it's heeded by literally every one of his commanders. And it's also h heeded by Guring who is his number two and who is obviously the commander-in-chief of the um of the Luftwaffer and is president of Prussia and you know and all the rest of it and you know is the second most senior Nazi and you know he's going this is a catastrophe. This is the last thing we want to be doing is going to war against Britain and indeed France. The Munich conference is a pretty interesting moment I would say in all of human history because you got the leaders of these bigger than life nations and the most dramatic brewing conflict in human history. Yeah. Chamberlain, Hitler, Mussolini, Dier. It's interesting when these bigger than life leaders are in the room together. M uh is there something that you know about about their interactions? Yeah, I think there's I think one of the things that's interesting is is that Hitler's got home advantage cuz it's on his turf and you know to start off with the first meeting is at the burg his beloved place in the Oasisburg overlooking Burkus garden in the Alps. So he's pretty confident because this is my mana this is my turf you know uh I'm not going to be bossed around by these guys. But Chamberlain, for example, is going there thinking, I've been around the blocks. No one can teach me anything. I've been a politician for ages. You know, I'm not going to be kind of capped out by this this sort of, you know, Austrian upstart. So, they're both coming at it with a kind of sort of slight kind of superiority kind of conflict. Um, interestingly, when you get to the actual meetings at the Bernabau in in Munich, um, a couple of weeks later, Chamberlain is cheered by the crowds when his car comes in, when he goes to his hotel, when he's moving from his hotel to the burnabout, you know, there are cows cheering him, we know, waving uni jacks, all this kind of stuff. Hillary does not like that at all. Not at all. Puts him on the back foot. And that's because the German people don't want war. In the same way that the British people don't want war, nor do the German people. The difference is that Hitler is a dictator and an autocrat and has the devotion of the people. So he can do what he wants in a way that Chamberlain can't. Chamberlain's hands are tied because he is an elected prime minister, an elected leader, political leader, and he's not head of state. So there is no question that it it is Hitler and Chamberlain that are the top dogs in this particular discussion. You know, Delier takes a backseat. Even Mussolini, although he's there, he doesn't want war either. You know, he wants to be left alone to do his own thing without anyone getting in the way, but he doesn't want he doesn't want to sort of it's not in his interest to have a European war. So, he's trying to avoid it. So, it is really you you see that the kind of alpha males in the room are are Chamberlain and and Hitler. And it's really interesting because Hitler's got this sort of slightly geralous voice and and very kind of pale blue eyes and such distinct things. Quite a long nose and you know he always says this is why he has mustache to kind of you know disguise the big nose you know. So I was saying to you earlier on before we started recording he does have a sense of humor. It's not maybe not one that you and I would kind of tap into but but he does have one. Whereas Chamberlain is just sort of, you know, he sounds like a sort of, you know, bit like an old man, you know, he's sort of silverhead and he looks like your sort of archetypal kind of British gentleman with his rolled up umbrella and his, you know, and his homberg hat and all the rest of it. So they they're both sort of caricatures in a funny sort of way. And yet the consequence of that these discussions you know these these great events happening you know you are you're absolutely going even which way the Munich crisis comes out you're taking a step closer to war it's just whether the war is going to happen kind of next week or whether it's going to happen a year hence but it's you know the Munich crisis obviously doesn't stem the inevitability of war at all it just heightens it. Do you think uh there are words that Chamberlain should have said, could have said that uh put more pressure on Hitler, intimidate Hitler more? Yeah, it's a really tricky one. It's such a difficult one because you're always looking at it through, you know, the enemy has a vote and you don't know what that vote is going to be and you don't know what it's going to look like. There's no question that that Europe, the rest of Europe is is is cowed by the um kind of impression of military might that the Germans have put out that they they certainly fear they are stronger than they actually are. And then on the other hand, they're also going, "Yeah, but you know, Germany doesn't have natural resources, doesn't have access to the world's oceans. You know, it's it's it's kind of, you know, it shouldn't be able to win a war." And so so they're kind of contradicting themselves at the same time, you know. So on one minute they're sort of, oh god, you don't want to take on those all those Nazis and all those swastikas and those automatan stormtroopers. But on the other hand, they're then saying, but actually Germany doesn't have much in its kind of, you know, in its basket. You know, it's it's got actually quite a lot of weaknesses and we should be able to kind of prevail blah blah blah. We'll just impose an economic blockade and then it'll be stuffed. And Britain is not ready to fight a war in in 1948, but nor is Hitler, you know, nor is Germany. So, you know, one is sort of striking out the other, but it's very easy to say that in hindsight, but at the time, you know, with people kind of digging trenches in High Park in the central London and barish balloons going up over London and, you know, children being evacuated from the cities and 92% of the population not wanting to go to war. You can see why he takes the course he does. I suppose that's that's what I'm saying. I'm not saying it's necessarily the right decision, but I I think it's an understandable decision. But what about even just on the human level? If I go into a room with a British gentleman versus go into a room with Trump, it feels like it's so much easier to read and manipulate the British gentleman because Trump is like Trump-like characters. It seems like Hitler is similar. Churchill is similar. It's like this guy can do anything. There's something terrifying about the unpredictability. Yeah. Yeah. It feels like there's something very predictable about Chamberlain. Yes, I think that's true. But also, one has to take a step back and think about what Britain represents. So therefore, what Chamberlain represents in 1938. Britain has the largest empire the world has ever known in 1938. You know, third of the world is pink as the saying goes, you know, and that saying comes from the kind of atlas of the world where all British territories are kind of colored pink. Yeah. And on top of that, it has lots of extra imperial territories as well. So, you know, if you look at there's there's this incredible map of global shipping in 1937. And there's these little ant lines of of ships going out and and one of the strongest antlines is going down to Argentina and South America from Britain. So, down past West Africa and down the southern Atlantic and there it is. And that's because Britain owns most of Argentina. It owns huge great farming estates and ranches. It owns the railway system. It owns many of the port facilities. So, you didn't even need an empire. You just need the the, you know, you need the the facilities that overseas trade and possessions can give you. And Britain not only has the largest navy, it also has the largest merchant navy, has 33% of the world's merchant shipping and access to a further 50%, you know, Greek, Norwegian, Canadian shipping that it can can access. So if you've got if you got access to 80 more than in in excess of 80% of the world shipping that puts you in an incredibly strong position and actually all sorts of other things have been going on. While they might not have been creating a huge army or producing enough Spitfires that they might want to up until this point what they have also been doing is stockpiling bulk site and copper and tungsten and huge reserves. And because Britain has this huge global reach, because it has its empire and its extra imperial assets, it can strike bargains that no one else can strike. So it can go into various countries around the world and can go, "Okay, I want you to guarantee me for the next 5 years every bit of your rubber supply. I will pay over the over the asking price to secure that." And it's doing that in the 1930s. So when war comes, it's got everything it possibly needs. Now you always need more because it's suddenly turning into a kind of you know a proper global long drawn out war. But but that is a huge advantage. So it is with that mindset that Chamberlain is going into those talks and thinking okay well I'm not going to get a war over the Czechov and who cares about them but but I am going to show Hitler that I mean business. Hitler's going who's this stuffy guy with his white hair? I don't give a toss about him. You know and it's he's coming at it from a completely different perspective. And I think one of the things that's so interesting from a dramatic point of view and from a from a historian's point of view or even a novelist point of view in the case of Robert Harris writing his book about these negotiations which I don't know if you've read it but it's really it's terrifically good um is the fact you've got two men two alpha males who are going to those negotiations from totally different perspectives and vantage points. And I think it's very easy for people today to forget how elevated Britain was in the late late 1930s. You know, the gold standard was tied to the pound, not the dollar. Um, and so Britain was the number one nation in the world at that time and and it just was. And it's so diminished by comparison today that it's hard to imagine it. And I think one of the interesting things about the historioggraphy about the narrative of how we tell World War II is that so much of it has been dictated by the shift in power that took place subsequent to 1945. And when people were starting to write these sort of major narratives in the 1970s and 80s and into the 1990s is through a prism of a very very different world. And so one of the reasons why you have this narrative that that you know Britain was a bit rubbish and hanging on the shirt tells of the Americans and you know all the blood was spelt in in Eastern front and you know Germany had the best army in the world and was only defeated because Hitler was mad and blah blah blah. You know that that kind of sort of traditional narrative. It's it's that narrative emerges through the prism of of what was going on in the 1970s and what was going on in the 1980s and the changing world rather than looking at it through the prism of the late 1930s or early 1940s. So there is this moment of decision. When do you think what lesson do you take from that? When is the right time for appeasement to negotiate for diplomacy and when is the right time for military strength offensive attacking uh for military conflict? Where's that where's that line? Where's that thing? Well, I kind of think it probably was when it was. I I mean Poland. Yeah. Honestly, I I'm not sure it would have been the right decision to go to war in 1948. I just I I think it would I I'm I can't predict because you can't second guess how things are going to play out because you just don't know. But but I I I'm not sure that Chamberlain made the wrong decision. I'm not saying he made the right decision. I'm just like I'm not I'm being a bit wishy-washy about this. You could have threatened it more. Imagine Churchill in those same meetings. Yeah, but but Churchill also appeases. I mean, he appeases Stalin all the time. I mean, you know, so the idea that Churchill's this big strong man and never appeases and, you know, he's gung over war. Churchill's out of the government at that time, he he he recognizes that you can't trust Hitler, he recognizes that Nazism is bad, but he because he's out of the government, he doesn't have a window on exactly where Britain is at that particular time in the way that Chamberlain does, you know. So, so I suppose what I'm saying is Chamberlain is better placed to make those decisions than than Churchill is. Which again doesn't mean that Church that Chamberlain is right and Churchill is wrong. It's just that's a massive pump to go to war in 1938 when you still don't have, you know, you've got a handful of Spitfires, you've got a handful of huracans, you haven't got enough, you know, your air defense system isn't properly properly sorted at this point. Um, your navy is strong. But you know what's that going to look like? I mean, if you do go to war, there's not going to be armies sweeping into Germany. It's just it's going to be accelerated industrialization for a year. So, no, you know, even if you go to war in 1938 over Czechoslovakia, Czechosaka will not be saved that, you know, France and Britain will not be going and invading Germany. That, you know, that is absolutely not going to happen. So, sort of what's the point? I mean, you know, if you're not going to do that, why didn't you accelerate your rearmament thereafter? Get your ducks in a row and then you can consider it. I mean, after all, you know, even in se September 1949, they don't really do anything. I mean, we talked about the kind of the SAR offensive, which isn't really an offensive at all. It's firing a one round of machine gun and scuttling back again. But, I mean, they don't even do that then, though. They're still buying time in 1949. And you know, Britain is only just about ready to take on the onslaught of the Luftwaffer in summer of 1940. Well, nobody's ready for war. No. And you always want more than you've got at any time, even when you're winning. But like really not ready. Even like like you mentioned with with Barbar Roa, Dasi Germany's really not ready. Not ready. Nobody's really except France. I swear. France. France have radios. Fine. But come on. Come on. When when uh when Nazi Germany invades Poland, I mean, yeah, it's terrible. It's terrible because I'm absolutely I I also do think that had France gone in in some force with some British troops as well, had they gone in, what would have happened is is that would have just that easily could have brought down Hitler because most of his commanders are his senior commanders are just thinking, "What the hell is going on? This is a catastrophe." I mean to a man I mean even Guring is thinking this is a terrible idea they are absolutely not convinced and when Hitler does his big talk to his his um he asked all his senior commanders to come to the burgov to brief them about the invasion of Poland it's just after the ribbon trough molotov pact of the 22nd of August go he he calls them all to Burgoff and says come in you know come in mufty come in civilian suits they all turn up and he gives them this kind of huge great speech and says this is the moment this is this is the time this what we're going to do and they're all going what? You're kidding me. What? We're going to Poland in, you know, on the 26th of August. That's the plan. Like two days time, you know, where's the plan? Where's the, you know, the whole point is that, you know, they're they're emerging and growing militarily, but they were supposed to have all these exercises where they, you know, coordinating ground forces, you know, the Panza spearhead with operations in the air with the Luftwaffer. None of that happens. So Poland becomes the proving ground. And actually they discover that there's lots of things that don't work and lots of things that are wrong. Um but but but you know it it's flying in the face of all convention military convention that that they you know he does this without any kind of warning and even by the first of September where there's been this kind of sort of 5-day delay um at the last minute negotiations. the last minute negotiations are thrust upon Hitler by people like Guring and by Mussolini and and the Italians going oh my god don't do this don't do this you know there's got to be a solution's absolutely chomping at the bit well in that case from a dark militaristic perspective his bet paid off well except that it ended in ruins in May 1945 with total collapse of Germany so you could say the worst decision he ever made was going into Poland and September 1939. Depends where you look at it. But I mean, yes, you know, it's successful in that, you know, Poland's overrun in 18 days. And there's there's so many counterfactuals here. But I mean, if you would say to Hitler on the 30th of April, you know, is he's sort of taking out the pistol from his holster on his sofa in the in the fur bunk and going, you know, so Adolf 1st of September 1949. Still backing himself on that one? I mean, he might might have a different view. The guy's insane and full of blunder. So, he probably would have said, "Yeah, do it all over again." Yeah, I'm sure he would have done as well. Conquest. Poland was not a mistake. Soviet Union was not a mistake. It's just some of the other people I was let down by by people not being strong enough. Yeah. The Prussian generals are all Yeah. Yeah. Of course. That's exactly what he'd say. Wasn't my fault. He might have uh quietly done some different decisions about Barbar Roa. Maybe the timing would be different. Maybe that all out central for us rather than kind of splitting into three. Yeah. Yeah. But he was very sure it seems like maybe you can correct me that Britain and France would still carry on with appeasement even after he invaded Poland. Absolutely. He he was completely convinced by it. There was clearly a kind of sort of 10 to 15% level of doubt, but what the heck, I'm gonna do it anyway. He was just he ratcheted himself up into such a lav of of kind of this is the moment. I have to do it now. This is fate. I'm 50 and and you know I could be taken out by an assassin's bullet. I've got this important life's work that I've got to do. We've got to get on with it now. There could be no more delay. This is my mission. You know, this is our mission of the German people. And either the German people have got the will and the and the spirit to be able to pull it off or you know I was wrong and and therefore you know we don't deserve to be a thousand right we don't deserve to be the master race black or white us or them either or it's same all the time so can you tell the story of the moltov ribbon trope pact 1939 so they make an agreement Nazi Germany the Soviet Union and that leads us just like you mentioned in a matter of days. Yeah. How compact everything is. It's just really, really fascinating. It's a beautiful summer in Europe. Summer of 1949, you know, it's one of these glorious summers that sort of never rains. It's just sunshine, sunny day after sunny day. It's kind of, you know, it's like that sort of golden summer of 1914 as well, you know, where sky always seems to be blue, fluffy white clouds, everyone's sort of, you know, but this sort of the storm clouds of war, to use that cliche, are kind of brewing. The Russians have have reached out to Britain and France and said, "Come, come on over. Let's negotiate, you know, let's see what we can do." Um, and there is just no stomach for that at all. I I mean if ever there is a I think a mistake that's Britain and France should have been a bit more into real politics and than they were that it's such an opportunity to to ensure that you to snooker the Third Reich and and they don't take it. Um because you know in many ways they see the westward spread of communism in exactly the same way that the Nazis see the threat of the westward spread of communism as something that's every bit as repellent as Nazism and and they don't want to be getting into bed with these guys. Um of course they kind of have to kind of change tack on that one in summer of 1941 in you know very quick order. Um and that's the whole point about Churchill appeasing Stalin. I mean, you know, it's all very well people saying, well, you know, Churchill wouldn't have appeased Hitler in the 1930s, but he does appease. He appeases all the time. Um, and they miss that opportunity. And the and the the French and British delegation is third tier commanders, generals going over. It's it's a it's a you know, it's a shit show. I mean, it Yeah, excuse my French, but I mean, it's just it's it's it's a nonsense that they're not ready for it. They're not prepared. the British guy, um, Admiral Drax, doesn't have any authority. Um, the whole thing is a complete joke. It's it's never going to get anywhere. You tell the story of this quite beautifully, actually. Uh, again, it's such a human story. I mean, the it seems like the Stalin and Soviet, they've already made up their mind. But I don't think they have. I think what they Wait, wait, wait. I mean, you described quite well that that they value in-person meeting. Yes. So, like Chamberlain should have just gone to Moscow. Yeah. Get on a plane. Like it I it's such a uh maybe it's a simplistic notion, but that could have changed the trajectory of human history right there. I really think it could have done. I think that was I think that's I think that's much more grievous mistake than than than Munich. Why are leaders so hesitant to meet? I I I'm told now by a bunch of diplomats that no no no no no there's a process you know first you have to have these diplomats meet and they have to draft a bunch of stuff and I sometimes have this simplistic notion like why not why not meet why not meet like I think there is a human element there um of course especially when there's this force that is Hitler well yes and because we humans we like to interact and and you like to see people in three dimensions and you know I'm sure it's why you always quite rightly insist on doing your podcast face to face cuz you want to get the cut of someone's chip and you want to be able to see them and and you want to see the intonation in their expression and the whites of their eyes and all that kind of stuff. And that that just does make a difference of course because you know we're fundamentally animals and we kind of we we want to be sizing people up and it's much easier to do that when you're a few feet away from each other than it is on a video screen or through the prism of someone else. Yeah. But there's also just you see the the humanity in in others. It's so much easier this you see this in social media. It's so much easier to talk shit about others when you're not with them. Yes. and and like military conflict is the extreme version of that. You can construct these narratives that they're not human, that they're evil, that they're you can construct a communist ideology, all these you can project onto them the worst possible uh version what of a human. But when you meet them, you're like, "Oh, they are just a person. They're just a person." Well, it's the world's great tragedy that that that it's only a few people that want to go to war and the vast majority want to live happily contented lives getting on with their neighbors. I mean, it has been ever thus. It's just it is those few that kind of ruin it for everybody else. But but but anyway, to go back to Leningrad um back in August 1939, they go halfcock. They're disrespectful to Soviet Union as a result of that. Um it gets nowhere. Had they been able to put on a really really firm offer there and then to the Soviet Union, Soviet Union would have would have probably come in. I mean, the big thing is is that the Soviet Union said, "This is a big stumbling block." The Soviet Union said, "Yeah, but we want to be able to march through Poland if we get threatened by Germany." Mhm. Both the British and the French just smell a massive rat there. They're basically saying, you know, if they agree to that, what they're what they fear is that Soviet Union will just march into Poland and go, "Yeah, but you said we could and take it." Which they unquestionably would have done, but it would have stopped the World War probably. They're willing to appease Hitler. They're not willing to appease Stalin in that situation. Well, they're not willing to appease anybody by that stage. That's the point. Well, they appeased Hitler because they did for the year before, but there now there's a bottom line, you know, which is which is Poland, you know. So, it's changed. That's why right but anyway the bottom line is they don't you know there is a there is a a reluctance on the part of French and the British to negotiate with the Soviet Union because they're communists don't like them don't trust them worry about what they're going to do with Poland and they're going to be you know jumping out of the fire into the kind of water and it doesn't come off and as a consequence of that Soviet Union continue to pursue more hardly you know um more more viciferously the opportunities that the um that the Germans are offering which is this split of Poland cuz Soviet Union wants that part of Poland back in its own sphere of influence and it doesn't want to go to war just yet and the agreement that they won't attack each other essentially. Yeah. Do you think Stalin actually believed that? No, he believed it in the same way that Hitler believed it that it was a cynical kind of, you know, convenient bit of real politic for now. I mean, I I think Soviet Union was as determined to get rid of the Nazis as the Nazis were determined to get rid of the Soviet Union. I think whoever fired first was not not decided at that point. But I do think from the moment that Hiller takes power in 1943, a conflict between Soviet Union, Nazi Germany is inevitable. Yeah. So either direction you think it's inevitable. Yeah, I think I think there's Yeah, there's a huge amount of evidence for that. Stalin probably wanted it what, like in 42 43? Yeah, something like that. Yeah. And you know, they're doing exercises and stuff and building out. He's not ready yet because he knows he's done the purges and he's got to get his his army, you know, he's got to get his armed forces back into shape and all the rest of it, but you know, so they have this incredibly cynical agreement, but at that point, you know, Hitler's hands are untied. You know, he no longer has to worry about about the threat from the Soviet Union. um he's got car plans to go into Poland and he doesn't believe that France and Britain are going to go to war over Poland. He's wrong about that obviously but but but France and Britain despite going to war with him still do nothing. So you know he's got away with it. Who was Churchill and how did Churchill come to power at this moment? Well Churchill is this absolutely towering figure in British politics. you know, who's been, you know, first a minister in the kind of naughties of the 20th century and the first years of of the 20th century. Um, first of the Liberals, then of the Conservatives. He's a former chancellor um um of the Jacka. Um he's a towering figure, but he's been in the wilderness because he's out of favor with the Stanley Baldwin government. um he's out of favor with with with Chamberlain, but he is this towering figure and he has been very outspoken as a backbencher, which basically means, you know, you're not a minister, you're not in the cabinet, you're just an ordinary member of parliament, but obviously you're an ordinary member of parliament, but you're also an ordinary member of parliament who has had ministries of state and who is this tyran figure. So, he's listened to in a way that other backbenches aren't. Um, and he has been saying, you know, we need to stand up to the dictators. We need to do this. um we need to rearm more more heavily uh and blah blah blah. So when war is declared he's brought back into the admiral um in charge of the navy which is Britain's senior service and um suddenly he's there and what happens is Britain doesn't really do anything. It's very difficult working with France because France is so politically fractured that they can't make any decisions and when you can't make any decisions you're just impotent. Um and so Churchill first mentions going into Norway mining the leads. So um the idea is that you're making life very difficult for the Germans to get iron ore out of Sweden. Their main their main source of iron ore is up in the northern part of Sweden in the Arctic Circle. It then goes on a railway through northern tip of Norway and then gets shipped down the um west coast of Norway into Germany into the Baltic. So, uh, Churchill suggests in September 1949, why don't we mine the leads, which are the leads are these passageways, um, out of the fjords and the in the north into the, uh, into the North Sea. Why don't we mine those and stop the Germans from from from, um, taking this. Everyone goes, "Well, yeah, that's quite a good idea, but they can't decide." And French are nervous that if they do that, the Germans retaliate and bomb France and all this kind of stuff. So, no decision is made until kind of April 19 1940. They go up to start mining the leads on exactly the same day that the Germans invade Denmark and and Norway and and so they're they're caught off guards. And at that moment really it's seen as a failure of Chamberlain's government. And there is a kind of a mounting realization that no matter how good he was or competent he was as a peaceime prime minister. He's not a wartime prime minister. You know, he's not served in the armed forces himself. He doesn't really understand it. It needs a different set of hands. And um his government falls on the 9th of May. it becomes inevitable that he's going to have to resign and the obvious person to take his place is Lord Halifax who is in the House of Lords but you can still be a prime minister and um he is without question the most respected politician in the country he's um u former viceroy of India he's seen as incredibly safe pair of hands man of resolute sound judgment etc etc um but he doesn't want to take it he feels physically ill at the prospect, doesn't want this responsibility. He's also not really a military man. He's got a slightly sort of withered hand which has prevented him from doing military service and he just blanches at this moment. And that really leaves only one other figure that could possibly take on this position and that's Churchill. So when Chamberlain resigns on the 9th of May and Halifax says it's it's not for me, um the only person who's going to slip into that position is Churchill and he becomes prime minister and he accepts it gladly. He feels like it is his mission in life. This is his moment cometh the outcome of the man. But he comes with a huge amount of baggage. I mean, you know, he's known as a man who drinks too much who's whose judgment hasn't always been great. You know, he was chancellor during the time of the general strike 1926. you know he backed Edward VII over the uh monarchy crisis when the king wanted to marry Wallace Simpson the divorcee Catholic divorcee etc etc so you know his judgment has been brought into question you know he is the man who was he who came up with the idea of the Gallipoli campaign which was you know an ignominious failure blah blah blah so there are issues over him you know he is seen as a hotthead and a man who doesn't have the kind of sound judgment of Halifax so the jury is is very much out and I think it's again it's one of those things where you have to put yourself in you have to look at this through the prism of what people were thinking in May 1940. Yes, he he was considered a taran politician, but he is seen also as a loose cannon and by no means the right person in this hour of darkness. And it is coincidental that the 10th of May 1940 when he takes over as prime minister, becomes prime minister, not through an election but by default of a new nationalist government. And so no longer a conservative comp government but a nationalist cross party coalition government for the duration of the war. Um which includes you know members of of the Liberal Party and also the Labor Party as well as Conservatives that it is by no means certain that that he's going to be able to deliver the goods. And it is also coincidentally the same day that the Germans launched case yellow, operation yellow, the invasion of the low countries in France. So these are tumultuous events to put it mildly. And it is also the case that you know only a couple of weeks before um Paul Reo has taken over as prime minister of yet another coalition government in France from from Dadier. So political turmoil is very much the watch word at this time for the uh for the western democracies just at the moment that the Germans are making their kind of you know their hammer strike into the west. This might be a good moment to bring up this idea that has been circulating recently brought up by Daryl Cooper who hyperbolically stated that Churchill was the quote chief villain of uh the Second World War. To give a good faith interpretation of that, I believe he meant that Churchill forced Hitler to escalate the expansion of Nazi Germany beyond Poland into a global war. So Churchill is the one that turned this narrow war Czechoslovakia, Austria, Poland into a global one. Um, is that accurate? No, I don't think it is. I mean, not least because the decisions over Poland were made by Chamberlain's government, not when Churchill was out of government. So, you know, Churchill wasn't even involved in that decision-making process at the time. No, I I don't think so. I mean again I I go back to kind of Britain's position in in the world in 1939. If you say we are going to defend the sovereignty of Poland and then you don't that is that looks really bad globally. You know Britain's prestige would plummet would lead to all sorts of problems. Um you are saying that you're giving car blanch to dictators to just run a mock and take whatever territory they want. you are risking a future upheaval of the global order um away from democracies into the hands of dictators. You know in the west people believe in democracy and believe in advancement of of and freedoms of people. This is you know to to echo the words of Roosevelt in August 1941. You know that they're aspiring to a world um free of want and fear. Now, obviously, there's still some issues with the form that democracy takes in the 1930s. It's not democratic for everyone. You know, try saying that if you're in Nigeria or uh or or India or whatever. Um or if you're, you know, in the black southern states of the United States. But the aspirations are there. And I think that's that's that's an important distinction. And I think by saying that that Churchill is the chief wararmonger of the Second World War, I think is is ludicrous. You know, it's the same thing about about the bombing, you know, the the the detractors of strategic air campaign always go, "Yeah, but you know, Germans had the Holocaust, but but weren't the weren't the allies just as bad killing all those civilians?" It's like, "No, because the moment Hitler stopped the war, the bombing would stop." You know, the moment the war stopped in Hitler's favor, the killing would continue and be accelerated. So the the thing you mentioned initially is the sort of the idealist perspective of well Britain can't allow sort of uh this wararmonger to break all these pacts and be undemocratic you know um murder a large number of people and do conquest of territory okay that's idealistic but if we look at a realist perspective, what decisions would minimize the amount of suffering on the continent in the next 50 years? So, one of the arguments that he's making, I happen to disagree with it, to put it mildly, is that Churchill increased the amount of suffering. So, Churchill Church Churchill's presence and decisions. So, we're not talking about idealistic perspective. We're talking about realist like the the reality of the war of Stalin of of Hitler of Churchill of uh of France and FDR. Did Churchill drag Hitler into a world war? Did he force Hitler to invade the Soviet Union? Did he force Hitler to then in invade uh attack Britain? Well, no, because because Hitler was always going to invade the Soviet Union if unless unless the Soviet Union invaded Germany first. So, that was always going to happen. Um, no one asked Hitler to invade the low countries and Norway and Denmark and attack Britain. Um he does that of course because he's not given a free hand in Poland but there's no question that Hiller would have also wanted to subdue France or certainly turn France from a democracy into a totalitarian state as well. I'm absolutely certain about that. So I think there's pretty definitive evidence. I mean it's obvious from everything he's said from everything he's written from everything everywhere that he was going to invade the Soviet Union. uh no matter what. Yeah. And France most likely. Yes. Also he would have done a deal with Britain. Britain could have coexisted. So actually there is a is there there is a possible reality. I don't know maybe you can correct me on this where Hitler basically takes all of Europe except Britain. Yes. But then he would have got so strong that he would have then turned on Britain as well. You know, because he he would, you know, the fear is that if you let him do this and then then he he gets greedy, he wants the next one, then he wants the next one, then he wants the next one and, you know, then he wants to take over the whole world. And, you know, that is that is the fear of the British. That is the fear of the Americans. That's a fear of President Roosevelt who's got a very we haven't even touched on this yet, but he has a very difficult uh um case on his hands because he's come into power also in January 1933 um as president of the United States on an isolationist ticket with a retrenching with a kind of sort of you know step away from the European old order. It's time for the Europeans on their own. Um it all sounds very familiar right now. um and and suddenly he's got to do this gargantuan political vault um and prepare the nation for war because he also fears like Churchill fears like most like Chamberlain feared as well um that that Hitler's designs are not purely on Eastern Europe and the Lebanon's there but would get ever bigger and I don't I don't doubt that they're right. I think if he'd prevailed in the Soviet Union, you know, he he'd always wanted more, you know, because his whole concept is the master race, you know. Yeah. I I think I think it should be said if we if we measure human suffering, if there was not Britain on the other side, if it was not a two-f frontont war that the chances of Hitler succeeding in the Soviet Union is much higher or at least a more prolonged war and there would be more dead, more enslaved and more tortured and all of this. Yes. and and ditto if you you know if the if the allies hadn't got involved against Imperial Japan you know it would have been would have been catastrophic I mean 20 to 30 million Chinese dead anyway you know with American and British intervention you know was it going to be in China without that I mean and elsewhere you know because because the reason why Japan invades French Indo-China now Vietnam um and Hong Kong and um and Malaya and Singapore and and so on and Burma is because it's not winning in China and it needs more resources because it's resource poor and America has cut off the tap. So is going into these countries to to get what it needs its rubber and oil and natural resources and ores precious ores and all the rest of it. And if it had been unchecked, it would have done so. And then it would have absolutely built up its strength and overrun the whole of China with even more deaths. So, you know, I I I think there is I think the one of the interesting things about the Second World War is is lots of wars and why people get involved in them are extremely questionable. But I think there is a moral crusade to to the Allies and what they're doing that I think is entirely justified. What I think is interesting also is that as the war progresses, you know, if the allies are supposed to be on the force of the good, how come they're doing so much bad? And at what point is doing bad stopping you from doing good? And at what point are you doing good but also doing bad at the same time? Such as destruction of cities, um destruction of monasteries on outcrops in southern Italy, you know, destruction of killing of loss of civilians, etc., etc. you know that these are these are difficult questions to to answer sometimes they're also incredibly interesting and I think that moral component starts to blur a little bit by kind of middle of the war by 1943 you know it's it's kind of easy to have a a fairly uh cut and dry um war in North Africa in the deserts of North Africa where you know the only people getting in the way are a few sort of Bedwin tribesmen or something but but once you start getting into Europe or getting into the kind of the the meat of highly populated countries in the Far East um for example, that's a different kind of fish because the scale of destruction is absolutely immense. But it is also the job of of political leaders um to look after and defend their own peoples first and foremost. And so what you're doing is you're trying to protect your own sovereignty, your own people before you're protecting other people. And so that's what leads to, you know, the whole way in which the allies are, the western allies are protracting war is to try and minimize the number of deaths of their own young men as much as they possibly can whilst at the same time winning the war. And that means bringing lots of destruction to your enemies, but also trying to minimize it. And the way you bring lots of destruction by to your enemies is by using immense firepower. and this concept of steal not our flesh which I mentioned earlier on and technology um so that you don't have to bring to bear too many of your young men's eyes and you don't have a repeat of the slaughter of the first world war. So, you know, it is really interesting that that in in our mind's eye when we're thinking of, you know, the Western Allies in in the Second World War, probably the first thing that comes into mind is Americans jumping out of landing craft on Omaha Beach on D-Day, for example. Those are infantrymen. They're the front line. They are the coldface of that. They're the first people going into the into the fire of the enemy. and we tend to think about guys in tanks, um, infantrymen with their garand rifles or, you know, machine guns or whatever. That's that's what springs to mind. Yet, actually, they're a comparatively small proportion of the army. So, no more than 14 to 15% of any army, allied army, is infantry. 45% are service corps service troops driving trucks and cooks and bottle washers and people lugging great big boxes of stuff you know and that's because by that stage you know the allies have worked out the way of war which is is to is to use is what I call big war this concept of of a very long tale logistics the operational art making sure that people have the absolute best you possibly can great medical care huge advances in in in first aid and and medical care of troops getting them back onto the battlefield and for using firepower and technology and mechanization to do a lot of your hard yards. So, you know, that's the principle behind strategic bombing. You know, if you can if you go over and bomb and you can destroy infrastructure and civilians and households, that makes it much harder for for corrupt to make those panther tanks and Tiger tanks or whatever it might be and guns. And, you know, you're disrupting the transportation system in Germany. you know, you're making life difficult for them to do what they need to do, then that means it's going to be easier for those 15, 14, 15% of infantrymen who've got to jump out of anticcraft to do their job. And you're trying to keep that to a minimum. And you'd have to say, broadly speaking, that's a very sensible policy that makes an awful lot of sense. Um, consequence of that is a huge amount of destruction. And maybe that's what Daryl Cooper's driving at, but no one asked Hitler to invade Poland. I mean, you know, that is the bottom line. No one asked Germany to go to war. No one asked Hitler to come up with these ludicrous ideology. Yeah. There's complex ethical discussions here about uh uh just like as you describe which are fascinating which are fascinating and uh war is hell and there's many ways in which it is hell. uh just for a little bit the steel man what uh Daryl is where he might be coming from is since World War II the simplistic veneration of Churchill sort of saying Churchill good Hitler bad has been used as a template to project under other conflicts to justify military uh intervention and so his general his and other people like libertarians for example resistance to that overly simplistic veneration of somebody like Churchill has to do with the fact that that seems to be by neocons and wararm mongers in the military-industrial complex in the United States and elsewhere using Hitler way too much using Churchill way too much to justify invading everywhere and anywhere. I well I I do agree with that. I I think oversimplification of anything is a mistake. You know, life is nuanced. The past is nuanced. It's okay to be proud about certain things and it's okay to be disgusted by other things. That's absolutely fine. You know, we have a complicated relationship with our past. It doesn't need to be black and white. And um you know, life is not a straight line. And of course, as you know, the allies make plenty of mistakes in in in World War II. Overall, I think they made the right calls. And I think one of the things that's really interesting is I think that that the Allies for the most part use their resources much more judiciously and sensibly than the Axis powers do and you know good um because that means they prevail. I think you know there are so many lessons um from World War II that could have been brought into the last the history of the last 30 years which weren't you know such as you know if you have if you if you decapitate an incredibly strong leader you get a power vacuum and if you don't have a solution for that power vacuum lots of bad elements are going to sweep into that in very quick order which of course is exactly what happens in in in Iraq so you know Donald Ronson going we don't do reconstruction well you freaking well should do. You know, this this if you're going to if you're going to take on this this particular challenge, you've got to see it through. You know, that's that's simply not good enough. You know, it's not good enough to go into Afghanistan and go, "Okay, we're going to change things around. It's going to be great. You know, all the women are going to have education. They won't have to wear kind of, you know, uh um won't have to cover up their bodies anymore. Um anything goes. We love liberalism. It's great. Um let's make cobble into a thriving city once more." and then suddenly bug out, you know, because what what what's going to happen? You're going to undo everything. And and I remember being in, you know, this is a bit of a segue, Lex, but I I remember being in in Northern Helman province back in, you know, when was it January 2008, and uh British troops had just taken over an absolute dump of a town called um Musakala. And I remember talking to this Afghan guy. He he just had all his willow trees chopped down to make room for a helipad that the allies wanted which they you know they put their kind of sur you know those cages with kind of rubble in the protective wall is it called Hesco I think it was called anyway I said to him what do what do you think about about the British being there and he just went shrugged at me lifted up his hands and said well you know if they stay great but they won't and and he said said you know if they stay then brilliant but he said I tell you what he said, "Taliban went great. They weren't fantastic." He said, "But I could leave my personal wall and no one would touch it. I could leave it on a wall for a week. No one would touch it." Said said, "Will they bring that kind of order?" You know, "Will will we have will we have peace here?" You know, they've just chopped down my my willow trees. You know, thanks a lot. And you you know you you you're seeing a total lack of understanding of the culture, ethnic differences, you're trying to impose a kind of western centric view onto something which is just some, you know, onto onto a onto a nation which isn't isn't ready for that. Now there are ways in which you know it looked like Afghanistan was starting to kind of emerge and there was a path and then just at the critical moment the west moves out with catastrophic consequences. What you have to say though is that in the west post 1945 the rehabilitation of Italy of Japan of western Germany was really good. You know, the consequence of of all that destruction, all that turmoil was thriving, high-proucing democracies which burst forth into the kind of second half of the 20 20th century and into the 21st century in pretty good order. Um so the lessons of the previous generation from the first world war had had been had been learned even though the scale of destruction the displacement of people is unprecedented in 1945 in 1939 what was the state of the militaries? What were the most powerful militaries on the world stage at that time? Well um in terms of naval power Britain as we've already discussed and and and the United States. France has a pretty large navy. Uh, Japan has a pretty large navy. Italy has a pretty large navy. But Italy's navy is by far and away its most modern aspect of its three services, airland and sea. Um, but it doesn't have any aircraft carriers and doesn't have any radar. So, you know, it's it's they've got modern battleships and battle cruisers, but without key modern bits of technology. So, Italy is really not ready for war. Oh, it's so not. It's so not. It's just again both Hitler and Mussolini, they they lack geopolitical understanding, you know, that's because they're so kind of focused on their narrow worldview and they view everything through that prison, but they can't see that bigger picture. And we should say that Mussolini, maybe you can correct me, but I don't think at any point he wants a war. He doesn't want a war. What he does want is he wants his own new kind of Roman Empire which extends over the Mediterranean, the kind of certainly the eastern part of the Med half of the Mediterranean, North Africa all the way down to kind of East Africa controlling the Sewish Canal. That that's that's what he wants. And I think he made clear that he was I mean there's always like this little brother jealous of Hitler kind of situation because he he wanted absolute power the way Hitler did but doesn't have it. Doesn't have it. And describe Yeah. There's a monarchy often forgotten. It's amazing. So there's always this limit and Hitler quite brilliantly once he gets some power he takes it all complete. He completely emasculates Mussolini. And yeah, he likes him though. It's really weird. Even when Muslim is about to fall in July 1943, he has a meeting at Feltree um just literally a few days before Muslini tumbles and he does that because he likes Mussolini. He likes him as a man and thinks he's being his friend and you know he respects him to a certain extent even though he's he he definitely views himself as top dog. Hitler does that is. Um, so it's kind of curious because I don't think Hitler particularly likes anyone really but but but he does seem to like Mussolini. But anyway, the problem with Mussolini is Muslim Muslim Italy is is very impoverished from the first world war, you know, and that of course leads to the rise of fascism and the overthrow of parliamentary democracy and and why Muslim takes place in the first place, you know, again, it's that kind of there's been this terrible disruption, there's been financial crisis that leads to kind of people looking at an alternative. You know, what's the alternative? Well, Mussolini is going, you know, we can be proud Italians again. lots of chess thumping, you know, wearing great uniforms, all the rest of it. People kind of think, well, you know, I have a piece of that and it kind of works and, you know, preferably the trains work on time under him and and so on and so forth. But he just gets ahead of himself, you know, and and actually the writings on the war in 1945 when he goes into Abiscinia and and you know, again, sort of what effectively are kind of by first world European standards privitive tribesmen in in in Abbiscinia. You know, they they have quite a tough fight there. you know, they they do prevail, but but it's not a complete walkover, and they get a bit of a bloody nose at times, and they shouldn't have done, and they're just not ready. They don't have the industry, you know, they're they're tied up into the Mediterranean. They don't have access to the world's oceans. They do have some merchant shipping, but not a huge amount. Um, you know, they just don't have what is required. They don't they're dependent on Britain for coal. Britain is the leading coal exporter in the world in the 1930s. So Britain's approach to fascist Spain and approach to fascist Italy has been very much sort of stick and carrot. It's like, you know, we'll let you do what you do as long as you kind of stay in your box and and you know, we'll continue to provide you with supplies and coal and whatever is you need as long as you don't kind of go too far. And so that's why Mussolini is very anxious in 1938 and again in 1939 to kind of be the power broker and kind of not let Germany go to war. But Germany's just, you know, they they signed the the Axis Pact of Steel in May 1939 where they become formal allies. This is Hitler and um Mussolini, Italy and Germany. But it's always a very very unequal partnership right from the word go. One of the reasons Mussolini signs it is because he fears that Germany has designs on Italy. Yeah. It's not because he thinks, "Oh, these guys are great. You know, they're our natural bedfellows." It's so that he can what what it's a mutually convenient pact whereby Germany gets on with whatever it wants to do up in Northern Europe and Eastern Europe. Italy is given a free hand to do whatever it wants to do. They'll just kind of watch each other's backs. They have borders, you know, Austria and and Italy border one another. Um, and they'll just do their own thing and they'll kind of help each other out with supplies and stuff. Um but but basically they won't they'll they'll be their own it's it's a kind of marriage of convenience. You know they're never expecting to be fighting alongside each other on the battlefield. Not really. There is a kind of obligation to do so but but it's it's an obligation with no expectation of ever actually happening. And so from Muslimini's point of view the pact still is is kind of you know it's just sailing your flag to one particular mass and kind of trying to cover your cover your back. And so long as he plays his cards right, you know, he can he can still get his coal supplies from Britain. He doesn't have to worry about that. You know, the pctor still doesn't make any difference to that. The the problem for him is is that in June 1940, he thinks that France is about to be defeated and that Britain will surely follow. And so he thinks, "Ah, I've got some rich pickings. I can take Malta. I can take British possessions. I can overrun Egypt. And you know, now is my time. But I I also need to kind of join the fight before France is completely out of the fight. Otherwise, it looks like I'm a Johnny come lately and I won't I won't get those spoils because the Germans will go, "Yeah, you can't have all this stuff. You've turned up too late. You need to be in the fight." So, he does it what he thinks is the perfect timing. And it turns out to be a catastrophic timing because, of course, Britain doesn't exit the fight. You know, Britain is still there. And you know by February 1941 a very very tiny British army in Egypt has overrun you know two entire Italian armies and taken 133,000 prisoners in North Africa. So you mentioned in the sea uh who were the dominant armies who were who was dominant in the air? Well in the air it has to be the Luftwaffer uh and it is also the Imperial Japanese both in the Imperial Japanese Navy and the Imperial Japanese Army. They both have air forces and one of the reasons that is because the quality of the pilots in Japan is extremely high because it's so difficult to get to get to the top position. You know, you are going to your frontline squadrons with at least 500 hours in your log book. To put that into some perspective, you know, a British RAF or Luftwaffer pilot would be joining their frontline squadrons with 150 to 170 hours in the log book. So it is that these guys are disciplined to within an inch of their lives. Um they are you know there are academic tests as well as physical endurance tests. You know they are the elite of the elite and they are extremely good. The problem they have is that there is a good number of them but there's not that many. The Luftwaffer is is the largest air force in the world in 1939, but it is already at a parity when in in aircraft production with Britain. Um, and the French have a kind of similar size army, but they're very very badly organized. So, they're also they're organized into different regions and they one region doesn't re is not really talking to another. And one of the problems that when case yellow, the invasion of German invasion of the west starts, France's army of the air is spread throughout France and has its own little area. You have one bunch of, you know, fighters and bombers in that block in, you know, in the Marseilles area. You have another block in kind of, you know, on the Britany coast and you have another block in around Sudan and you have another that. So, so consequently, they're never be they're never able to kind of bring their full strength to bear. So it's although although they've both got about three and a half thousand aircraft on paper and about two and a half thousand that are fit to fly on any one given day, the Luftwaffer because they're the aggressor can choose how they mass their aircraft and where they attack and and at when. So in other words, you can send Luwaff can send overwhelming amounts of bombers and fighter planes and pulverize a French airfield and catch them napping. Because the French don't have a defense system, they can't see whether they're coming. So their only hope is to kind of take off and just hope they stoogge around the sky and hope they bump into some Luftwuffer. And of course that's inherently inefficient and they get, you know, they get destroyed. They get destroyed in in penny packets rather than on mass. difference with the RAF is is the RAF is not done on an air force basis where you have each air core or air fleet has a handful of bombers, a handful of um fighters, a handful of reconnaissance planes. They have different commands. So they have bomber command, fighter command, training command, cursal command, and they all have very specific roles. So they're they're structured in a completely different way. and the other and that's because they're an island nation um and because they see their role militarily in a in a in a different way and because the rearming that Britain has done in the 1930s is all about defense. It is not about aggression at this point, not about taking it to the enemy. It is it is showing you're tough but also first and foremost getting your ducks in a row and making sure that you don't get defeated. So this is the principle behind the the first the world's first fully coordinated air defense system which is the radar chain it is the observer core it is control rooms it is interesting technology such as identification friend or foe IFFF which is where you have a little pulse which so you have these control rooms and you have a map table and you have a tote board in front of you where you can see what squadrons are airborne what state of readiness they're at you know whether they're engaging the enemy little lights come on and show you you can see weather maps you can see see the cloud ceiling. You see all of that at a glance. Then you're on a dis and then down in front of you is a massive great map of southern England. You've got crooious sort of moving plots. So you can through a combination of radar which picks up a kind of a rough idea of what's coming towards you combined with the observer core you have overlapping observer core stations all over Britain covering every single inch of airspace over Britain looking up into the air and seeing how many aircraft there are a and at what height they are and you have little um thing called a panagramraph which is a a piece of equipment which helps you judge um altitude. You then ring through that that all comes into the control room along with the information from the radar stations which is going into a single filter room at at fighter command headquarters which is then being pushed straight back out to the sector stations. So this information is being updated all the time. So you have a plot and it looks like it might be you know enemy bombers 30 plus for example that's constantly being adapted. So as more information comes in, you will change that and then you can see that actually it's only 20 aircraft or 22 aircraft or whatever. So you're updating that and that little figure is put on the on your little plot and moved across and so you can see and then because you can identify your own aircraft, you can then see where they are moving and you're also on um the guys in the air are on the radio to ground controllers who are in these control rooms and they're saying okay well if you proceed at you know angels 18 18,000 ft you know on a vector of you know 150 you should be seeing your enemy enemy bombing formation any moment now. And what that means is that you're not on the ground when the enemy are coming towards you with their bombers to hit your airfield, which means you're in the air. So that all they're doing is hitting a grass airfield, which you've already got bulldozers and diggers and graders and lots of scalpings and earth ready to fill in the potholes and it means you're good to go. And it means as a consequence of all that when the Germans do um launch their all-out assault on Adler Eagle Day on the 13th of August 1940, the British are ready. You know, they're they can see them coming. They know what to expect and they can anticipate. And it means that they're not being caught with their trousers down on the ground. And as a consequence of that, of the 138 airfields there are in um RAF airfields there are in Britain, only one of them is knocked out for more than 48 hours in the entire summer of 1940. And that's Manston on the tip of the Kent coast uh which is abandoned for the duration. So these are the two biggest air forces. So those are the two biggest air force. So Lufafa we should say German I mean they're like the uh the legendary the terrifying air force. They are maybe maybe they're slightly believing their own hype. There's no question about it. Well the rest of the world is also right. They've just had it too easy. So they don't have they don't have ground controllers. They don't have an air defense system in in in Germany because why would you need an air defense system? We're going to be the aggressor. You know, there's no scenario where we'll have to defend the airspace of the Third Reich because we're on the offensive. So they just haven't prepared it. So there's that clash, the Battle of Britain, the clash of air forces. What explains the success of Britain in defending? Well, it's I mean you and everyone always says, you know, the the few were the last, you know, the last line of defense against the Nazi hordes and all this kind of stuff, and it's just it's all rubbish. They're the first line of defense. Second line of defense is the Royal Navy, which is the world's largest. And there is absolutely no chance on earth that a German invasion force made up of Ryan river barges, one of out of every three is motorized and the other two aren't, is ever going to get successfully across the English Channel. And even if they did, they will be repulsed. I mean, they just it's just no chance. And it is often forgotten that while the Lufra is coming over and bombing Britain every single day, so is the RAF going over and bombing Germany. And one of the problems that the Germans have is is that these bombers need fighter protection. You know, fighter planes are there to protect the bombers. And they don't have much fuel. And the Mesimmit 109E, the ME as a model is of of 1940 is the main stay of the German fighter force in the summer of 1940. And they don't have much fuel. So they need to conserve their fuel which means they need to be as close to Britain as they possibly can which is why the majority of them are all in airfields which are hastily created in July 1940 following the fall of France in the Padacall which is the closest point you know that's where the channel is its narrowest and all the rest of it and also in the northern Normandy and that's where they're flying from but what that means is that even if you're completely rubbish bombing which the British are in 1940 they haven't developed those navigational aids that create untold accuracy by the end end of the war 1940 they don't they don't have that luxury it's a target-rich environment I mean you know you can barely miss if you go over to the aisle of you know the over to the paddala I mean it's literally it's just like one huge great kind of hub of of fighter airfields and consequently that means that every single German squadron which only is 12 airplanes strong on on establishment and very often even fewer than that always has to leave two airplanes behind to defend their own airfield and it's really interesting when you look at kind of prison of war statements from from Lufka at Crown Crew that have been downed. They're all bugged at a holding place called Trent Park. You can see the transcripts of these conversations. They're all going about how annoying it was that the RAF were over every night and they can't sleep and you know when they if only they just shut up and leave them alone and not bomb them. You know, this is just part of the narrative of the battle of Britain that's completely left out. It's always the stocky, you know, the plucky few against the kind of the, you know, the Nazi hordes and all the rest of it. And it's just, it's a complete misnomer. And by that time, aircraft production in Britain is massively outpacing the Germans. Um, and the best ratio that the Germans achieve in 1940 is July 1940 when the British produced 496 new Huracans and Spitfire single engine fighters and um the Germans only produced 240 single engine fighters. That's the best ratio. And of course, you know, that is the British outproducing the Germans 2 to1. And what that means is by the end of October 1940 when the battle of Britain is sort of, you know, officially designated as being over. Um the single engine fighter force of Luwaffer is less than 200 from 750 or whatever it was in beginning of July. Whereas the British fighter force had been 650 or whatever at the beginning of July is now well over 750. And Britain is out producing. Yeah. by to a massive degree and that that continues and you know that is a a ratio that just increases as the war progresses. I mean Britain produces 132 and a half thousand aircraft in the Second World War. America produces 315,000. So why is there this legend of the Luftwafa? Well because it's the spearhead of the Blitz Creek. So it has to do with the Blitz Creek. It's to do with the Blitz Creek. the the the Lufa becomes the kind of the bogeymen of the Third Reich. You know, they're blamed for everything, but that's because they're completely abused. They're the only part of of the Third Reich's armed services. The only part of the Vermach, the Vermac being the Navy, the Army, and the Air Force. Um, that is in constant use the whole time or constant abuse, I should say. In Britain and America, they rotate their their pilots really really carefully. By the time that but the that that you know you got the eighth fighter command, for example, part of the mighty eighth, the eighth air force operating in Britain. By the by by the end of 1943, you would have in a squadron that would have 16. You would never have more than 16 airborne from a squadron at any one time. you would have 40 to 45 pilots for to service 16 in the air and similar number of aircraft which means you're not overusing these guys and what would happen by that stage of the war by 1943 you know a young fighter pilot coming to a to a thunderbolt squadron or a Mustang squadron for example um at the end of 1943 beginning of 1944 he'd have 350 hours of of consecutive flying because you can train in in America in Florida or California or Texas or or wherever However, you've got you you you can process many many more people because the training is much more intense because you've got clear skies. So, you're not it's not a question of of oh, we'd like to take you out out Fritz this morning, but you know, it's a bit cloudy and and oh, the RAF are over or you know, Y Air Force are over so we can't fly today. So, in Germany, pilot training is constant, air crew train is constantly being interrupted by by the war, by shortage of fuel, by inclement weather, etc., etc. In America, you have none of those problems. And Britain, because of his global reach, also has training bases in in what was Rhodesia, now Zimbabwe, in South Africa, um, in Canada as well. And so, you're able to process these these guys much better. You're able to give them more training. So, when they come, they're the absolute the finished article as pilots. What they're not the finished article as is, say, a bomber pilot or as a fighter pilot. But that's okay because you join your squadron of 40 other guys for 16 airborne. and the old hands kind of take you up a few times. So you arrive at I don't know let's say some airfield in in Suffukk in East Angler in England and you know you'll have 10 days to two weeks acclimatizing getting used to it the you know the old hands will put you through your paces give you some trip tips you can pick their brains during kind of while you're having some cow and and listen in on some briefings then the first mission you do will be a milk run over to France where the danger is kind of pretty minimal you know and and you can build up your experience so by the time you're actually sent over on a mission to Berlin or or Bremen or you know the RU or whatever you're absolutely the business so qualitatively and quantitatively you are just vastly superior to anything the Luftwaffer has got the Luftwaffer by that stage in contrast 1940 new pilots coming to frontline squadrons with you 150 170 hours on their in their log books less than 100 90 92 hours something like that it's not enough and and they're just being flung straight into battle and they're getting absolutely slaughtered and they're also because their machines are quite complicated, there's no two-seeers really. So, no two-seater trainers. So, the first time you flying in your FAWolf 190 or your Mess 109, it's this horrendous leap of faith which you as a young bright Luftwuffer fighter pilot know that you're not ready for this and it can bite you. And something like a um a meshesmith 109 has a very high wing loading. So it's very maneuverable in the air, but it's got this tiny wings. It's got this incredible torque. This deep Ben's DB 605 engine with this huge amount of torque and it just wants to flip you over. So if you're not used to it, and it's got a narrow undercarriage as well. If you're not used to it, you you could just crash. So, in the first couple of months of 1944, they lose something like 2,400 aircraft in the air and and pilots and about 3,400 are accidents. So, it has to do with training really. Yeah. Not training enough. It's training and resources and supply. And the Second World War, more than any other conflict, is a war of numbers. There are differences that decisions that generals can make. There are um moments where particular brilliance and bravery can seize the day, take the bridge, you know, hold the enemy at bay or whatever. But ultimately, you know, you're talking about differences which might make a month's difference, 6 months difference, maybe even several years difference. But ultimately there's a certain point in the Second World War where the outcome is absolutely inevitable because the guys that lose can't compete with the numbers that the guys are going to win at. So in that sense, you could think of World War II as uh as a battle of factories. Yes. What does it take to win in the battle of factories in out manufacturing military equipment against the Allies? It's it's efficiency really. So I always kind of you know I I was think let's take the example of the Sherman tank for example the mainstay of the Western Allied forces and a fair number of them sent to the Soviet Union as well for that matter. Uh I think you've said it doesn't get the respect it deserves. Maybe doesn't get the respect it deserves. So, the Sherman tank, the 75 mm main battle gun, which a sort of medium velocity, fire a shell around kind of 2,000 ft pers compared to the notorious, infamous German 88 mm, which can fire at kind of third fast again, like 3,000 ft pers. But on paper, a Tiger tank coming around the corner and a Sherman tank coming around the corner, it should be no match at all. Tiger tank is 58 tons. Looks scary. is scary. It's got a massive gun. It's got really thick armor. Sherman tank doesn't have as thick armor. It doesn't have a gun that's as as big. It should it should be an absolute walkover. And yet, at about 5:30 p.m. on Monday the 26th of June 1944, a Sherman tank came around the corner of a road called a Rumu, little village called Fontine Lanol in Normandy, came face to face of a Tiger tank and won. How does this happen? Well, I tell you how it happened. Because the commander of the Sherman tank was experienced, had one up the spout. So what I mean by that is he had an armorpiercing round already in the breach. Soon as he saw the the Tiger tank, he just said fire. That armor piercing round did not penetrate the Tiger tank. It was never going to. But what it did do was it created a it hit the gun mantlet, which is a bit of reinforced steel that you have just as the barrel is entering the turret. And that caused spalling which is a little shards of little bits of molten metal which then hit the driver of the Tiger tank in the head. And he was screaming you know gone himl or whatever and and you know was couldn't really see. The moment they got hit the commander of the Tiger tank retreated into the turret of the Tiger. The moment you retreat into the tig into a turret you can't see. You can see because you've got periscopes but your visibility is nothing like as good as it is when you've got your head above the turret. Immediately after that the armor piercing round from the Sherman tank was repeated by by a number of high explosive rounds which are rounds which kind of you know detonate have a little minor charge. Then there was a second charge which creates lots of smoke and and and in moments in the first 30 seconds 10 rounds from that Sherman tank had hit the Tiger tank before the Tiger tank had had unleashed a single round itself and the crew then surrendered. So, you didn't need to destroy the Tiger tank. You just need to stop it operating. If it hasn't got a crew, it's it's a it's a it's just a chunk of metal that's inoperable. So, that's all you need to do. And what that tells you is that experience counts, training counts. Um, the agility of the Sherman tank also counts. It's a smaller shelf, therefore it's easy to manhandle, which means you can put more in a brereech quicker. Um, there's features on a Sherman tank, like it's the first tank to have a gun stabilizing gyro, which means it's more effective on the move. There's also an override switch on the underside of the turret so that the commander, if he just sees something out of the corner of his eye, can immediately start moving the the turret before the gunner who is down in the belly of the turret can can react. There's many different factors of it, but the main fact of all is there 1,347 Tigers built. There were 49,000 Sherman. So that means there's 36 Shermans to every single Tiger. So you actually have an incredible uh uh video. You talk about this a lot from different angles about the the top five tanks and and then the bottom five tanks of World War II. I think was it the Tiger that made both the top five and the bottom five? The problem with a Tiger tank is it's really huge. We should say that you keep saying the problem but the one of the pros of the Tiger tank it's very huge. It it's I mean the psychological warfare aspect of it is terrifying. Yes. So I I don't know what the other pros I mean I guess yeah the the 88 mm high velocity and all the rest of it you know it's pretty fearsome but but there are there are pragmatic problems the the big problems is the Germans are are incapable of mass production on a scale that Americans could do. Frankly even the British can do. I mean they're just they're just not in that league. The reason they're not in that league is because they're in the middle of Europe. They don't have access to the world's oceans. They don't have a merchant fleet. They can't get this stuff. It hasn't gone terribly well in the Soviet Union. um you know they can't process it and they're being bombed 24 hours a day and so all their factories are you know having to split them all up and that is inherently inefficient because you're then having to kind of move different parts around and you know you're then having the whole process of having to travel from one place to another to get stuff you haven't got much fuel. So the consequence of that is that what you do is you think okay we can't massproduce so let's make really brilliant tanks but they've lost sight of what a really brilliant is you know really brilliant to their eyes is big scary big gun lots of armor but actually what conflict in World War II shows you is is that that you need more than that you need ease of maintenance you need reliability and the problem with having the bigger the tank the more complex like the maintenance equipment is, you know, you need a bigger hoist, which then means you need a bigger truck, which then uses more fuel. So, for example, the Tiger tank is so big that it doesn't fit on the loading gauge of the European railway system. So, they have to have different tracks to roll onto the wagons that will then transport them from A to B, you know, take them from West Germany to Normandy. Then they have to take them off, then they have to take off the tracks, put on combat tracks, then move them into into battle and hope that they don't break down. The problem is when you have you start the war that's not very automotive and you've only got 47 people for every motorized vehicle in Germany compared to three in the United States or eight in France is that you've got lots of people who don't know how to drive. You've also means you haven't got lots of garages and mechanics and gas stations and and and so on. And so you're then creating an incredibly complex beast, but you want that complex thing to be as simple as you possibly can be. And that's the beauty of the Sherman tank, you know, all those guys in America, they're used to driving stick cars, you know, one of there's three people for every automobile, you know, and that includes, you know, the old and children. So almost, you know, every young man knows how to drive. And when you get into a Sherman tank, it's got a clutch, it's got a throttle, the brakes are the steering mechanism. Um, the clutch is where you would expect the clutch to be. It's got a manual shift. You put your foot on the clutch and you shove it into second gear and off you go, or reverse or whatever. And it literally couldn't be easier. Anyone who can drive a stick car could drive a Sherman tank. Seriously, not everyone can drive a Tiger tank. It's incredibly complex. Really, really is. And that comes with a whole host of of problems. And of course, you don't have the numbers. You don't have the numbers. You know, you've got 1,347 of them. You've got 492 King Tigers, which are even bigger. And, you know, at a time where you are really short of fuel and you're really short of absolutely everything. And those shells are huge and they're harder to manhandle. And weird little things that the Germans do, you know, for all their design genius, the loader is always on the right hand side. Now, in the 1920s and 19s and and 30s, children were taught to be right-handed. You weren't allowed to be left-handed. So, you were right-handed. So, you want to be on the right hand left hand side of the gun. So, you can take the shell from your right and swivel it into the brereech with your from your right side. But the loader in a in a Yag Per or Pamper or a Tiger is always on the on on the right hand side of the bridge, which is ergonomically makes no sense whatsoever. Why do they do this? I've never found an answer to this, but you know, so there's all these little things and and as a soldier coming up against, you know, you're an American GI and you're coming up against a a Tiger tank, you don't care about the fact that it's difficult to maintain or the problems involved of trying to get it to the battlefield. All you care about is is this monster coming in front of you. It's squeaking and clanking away and it's incredibly scary and it's about to blow you to bits. That's all you care about and quite understandably so. But but those who are protracting the war at a higher level and historians that come subsequently and and look at all this stuff, they do need to worry about all these things. I remember the same Georg Thomas, the architect of the hunger plan. Um, I found this this this minutes of this meeting which I think was either on the 4th of December or the 5th of December 1941. So, it's just before the Red Army counterattacks outside Moscow in the winter of 1941. And it's a meeting about weaponry. And and I and this is a verbatim quote. He says, "We have to stop making such complete and aesthetic weapons." In other words, we've consciously been building overengineered and aesthetically pleasing weapons up until this point. And they sort of half manage it, but don't quite. We could probably talk for many hours about each of these topics. We could we we could talk for 10 hours about tanks. I encourage people to uh to listen to your podcast World War II pod. We have ways of making you talk. It's great. Oh, yeah. But we also do we got um got a new YouTube channel and um website called World War II headquarters. There are lots of walking the ground and videos of that and all sorts of stuff and little explainers of going around tanks and stuff and the weaponry and documents and photographic archives. So the idea is to sort of turn it into a kind of real hub of anyone who's interested in this subject. It's a place where they can go and find out just a whole load more. I love it. So, like I said, we could probably talk for many hours on each of these topics, but let's look at some of the battles and maybe you can tell me which jumps out at you. I want to talk to you about uh the Western Front and definitely talk about Normandy. But so, there was the Battle of Midway. Yep. In uh 1942, which is a naval battle. There's Eastern Front Stalingrad, probably the the deadliest battle in human history. Then there's the Battle of Kursk. Yeah. Which is a tank battle. The largest tank battle in history. Probably the largest battle period in history. 6,000 tanks, 2 million troops, 4,000 aircraft. Mhm. And then that takes us also to the Battle of the Bulge in Normandy, the Italian campaign that you talk a lot about. So what do you think is interesting to uh try to extract some wisdom from before we get to Normandy? Is do you find as a historian the battle of Kursk or battle of Stalingrad more interesting? Stalenrad is often seen as the turning point. Well, I I yeah, I think so. Uh I I mean it's really interesting. Um so they get through they get through 1941. Barb Rosa doesn't happen as as the Germans hope it will. You know, the whole point is to completely destroy the Red Army in 3 months and that just doesn't happen. And I think you can argue and argue convincingly that by let's say the beginning of December 1941, Germany is just not going to win. It it it just can't. And and let me tell you what I mean by that. So if you take an arbitrary date, let's say the 15th of June 1941, Germany at that moment has one enemy, which is Great Britain, albeit Great Britain plus Dominion Empire. Fast forward 6 months to let's say the 16th of December. It's got three enemies. It's got Great Britain Dominion Empire, USSR and the USA. It is just not going to win. You know, for all the talks of wonder weapons and all the rest of it's just not going to, you know, it it has lost that that battle. Having said that, Soviet Union is still in a really really bad bad situation. it is being helped out a huge amount by um supplies from the United States and from Britain. You know, just unprecedented amounts of material being sent through the Arctic or across Alaska into into the Soviet Union at that time. It is absolutely staggering how much is committed by Roosevelt and Churchill to to try and stem the flow in in the Soviet Union because for all the all the announcements and and pride that the Soviet Union has about moving factories to the other side of the Eurals and stuff which they do in 1941, huge amounts are overrun intact by the Germans in the opening stages of Barbarasa. I mean really, you know, colossal losses, huge amounts. So you know the grain has gone, coal has gone, um entire factories have gone, steel production goes down by kind of you know 80% in the Soviet Union in 1941 and into 1942. So in 1942 despite the vast amount of numbers of men that they have at their hands. I mean they they create 80 new divisions in the second half of 1941 for example. I mean Britain never has 80 divisions in the entire Second World War. Division being about rule of thumb 15,000 men. So, you know, despite that, and that is because Stalin's meddling, the wful state of the Red Army in 1941, etc., etc., which we've already sort of touched upon. So, 1942, it's is still in a really bad way, but Germany's in a really bad way, too. It's the the the attrition it's it suffered in 1941, it's winning itself to death in 1941. So it's having these huge great encircumments like the encirclement of KEF in September 1941 you know capturing a further kind of best part of 700,000 Red Army troops etc etc but in the process of doing that it is constantly being attitted you know both both in battle casualties but in also mechanical casualties too just can't cope it's too the scale is just too big and what happens is with every moment that the German forces that ultimate victory slips away. So Hitler's personal handling of the battle increases. And you know, you can say what you like about him, but he just hasn't had the military training to do that. He might have amazing attention to detail. He might be able to understand, you know, have an enormous capacity to remember units and where they are on a map. But he was only a half corporal in the First World War. He's never been to staff college. You know, he might have read lots about Frederick the Great. I mean, I've read lots of history, but that doesn't mean to say I'd be a competent field marshal. Um, so he is not the right person for the job at all. And he micromanages and and he looks at and and figures and doesn't understand what it's like at the actual front, the coldface. So he's he's stifling the very thing that made the German army effective, which is the ability to give commanders at the front the freedom on their leash to be able to make decisions and battle command decisions. And he's taken that away from them. So he's basically making them go into battle with decreasing amounts of supplies and and firepower and with one hand behind their back in terms of decision-m process and that is not a good combination. The other problem is that he decides rather than going for Moscow in 1942 because basically there's a kind of cooling off period in the in the winter because of the conditions. But everyone know the Soviet Union know the Red Army knows that the moment spring's come there's going to be another offensive be another major offensive in the summer. That is absolutely as certain as you know day following night etc. The problem that the Germans have is they just don't have enough. They have less than they had when they launched Barbarasa the previous year. The Soviet Union has more. It is better prepared. It knows what's coming now. It's kind of learning some of the lessons, starting to absorb the lessons. Stalin, coincidentally, is pulling back from his very tight leash. And the way that Hitler is doing the opposite and increasing his micromanagement and control freaky. And what Hitler decides is rather than going for Moscow, he's going to go for the oil fields. And this is absolutely insane because what's going to happen when they get to the oil fields? I mean, does he think really that the Soviet Union are going to let those oil fields come into German hands intact? Even if he does let them get in intact, what are they going to do with that oil? I mean, oil needs to be refined. Where are you going to refine it? You know, they don't have any or they don't have many oil refineries. How are you going to ship that oil to where you need it to be in the factories in the Third Reich and into your, you know, process into into gasoline and then get it and diesel and get it to your Yubos, get it to your tanks, get it to your armored units. How are you going to do that? How do you transport it from from the uh from the Caucuses, which is a long long way away from from Berlin? How you going to do that? There's no pipelines. There's only some pipelines. They've been built by American money and American engineering and they're going backwards towards the eurals, not forwards. They have no more rail capacity whatsoever. They just don't have the oil tankers. So, it's just it's it is absolute la la land. It is incredible that when you look at the detailed literature that the Germans have. No one is asking this question in the in the spring and summer early summer of 1942. the logistics question in part. No one is saying, "Okay, it's great that we're going to go to the caucuses and get all this oil, but then what?" No one is asking that question, nor how do you provide resources and feed and the soldiers and all that kind of stuff. I mean, it's so so the case prove first of all, they get distracted by going into the Crimea and they go, "Well, we got to do that first." So, they have to get Sevastapole and the Crimea, which they do. And then they have to push on and and and at this point suddenly looming in front of them is Stalingrad on the banks of the Vular. This this city this industrial city which has Stalin's name and Hitler goes okay what I'm going to do now is I'm going to split my forces so half of you can go south towards the Caucuses and the rest of you can confront Stalenrad. And on Boach just who's the commander just goes that's nuts. That makes no sense whatsoever. you know, you're you're you're you're splitting the mission. So, he fires him. So, suddenly they get get into this assault for Stalinrad and it becomes this sort of street fight. Street fighting is the worst kind of fighting. I mean, the reason why the Israelis have just blown everything up in in Gaza is because otherwise you can't see. You know, you need a field of fire. This is fighting up in a fighting in a buildup area is is horrendous. Yeah. To clarify, we're talking about urban warfare, doortodoor, building to building. It's incredibly difficult and home advantage is colossal in this this instance and of course it's piping hot when they attack in kind of August into early September and then it suddenly gets very very cold and at the same time American mechanization and slightly a British mechanization but primarily American trucks are enabling Zukov to plan this great Pinser movement. So it is, you know, and and Russians will hate me for saying this. Um, and I probably will get a whole load of bots on the back of it, but but but the truth is is it is not the street fighting that destroys sick army. It is the encirclement, the subsequent encirclement. So they the Germans have been sucked into this street battle in in Stalingrad. Cannot give up. We cannot give up. We cannot back down. We cannot pull out. We've got to we've got to destroy this city. Meanwhile, while their backs are turned and while most of their forces are going off to the caucuses on a wild goose chase for absolutely zero oil incidentally um and they never get remotely close to Baku, this huge great penser movement is is is being planned and it is only possible through mechanization from the United States. And that is the big turning point because from that moment onwards the Germans are on the back foot. They're basically going backwards. There are little small character attacks. There is obviously the cursed salient for example. Um but it it it's game over. you know, the the catastrophe of the surrender of the final. I mean, the writing's on the wall at the end of 1942 by by November 1942 when when the when the uh the two um Soviet fronts meet up then then you know there is no possible chance of escape for Sig Farmy. They are consigned. They are toast. And their final strand obviously happens at the very beginning of February 1943. But that's all over. Then at the same time that that is happening, disaster is unfolding in North Africa because Hitler has insisted on massively resupplying the Mediterranean theater. And the problem there is the amount of equipment that is lost in North Africa is greater than it is at Stalingrad. I don't think you could argue that psychologically Tunis is a greater loss than Stalingrad. It absolutely isn't. But you have to see them in tandem as this is two fronts. This is eastern front, southern western front and this is the first time that the Americans have been on the ground against access forces and they lose big time. The allies become masters of the North African shores on the 13th of May 1943 and it is a catastrophe and in that time 2,700 aircraft have been Luftwaffer aircraft have been destroyed over North Africa between November 1942 and May 1943 and overall the subsequent that summer as well. Um it's really interesting the Luftwaffer loses between June and October 1943. So this is including the Kursk battle which that takes place in July 1943. In that period the Luftwaffer loses 702 aircraft over the Eastern Front but 3,74 aircraft over the Mediterranean. So I think one has to also one of the lessons about studying the Second World War is one has to be careful not to assign strategic importance to to boots on the ground. It can be of great strategic importance, but not necessarily. You know, no one would argue, for example, that the Guadal Canal is not an absolutely game-changing battle in the in the Pacific War, and yet the number of troops compared to, you know, what's going on in the Eastern Front or even, you know, the Western Front is is is tiny in comparison. So, it is absolutely true that the most German blood is lost on the Eastern Front, but that doesn't mean to say that it's more strategically important than the Western Front. It's a it's it's and it's not saying that the western front is more strategic either. It's just you have to kind of be balanced about this. The psychological blow of Stalingrad is immense and you you cannot belittle that. I mean there's the we went over it really fast but there is a human drama element. Yes. But yes, when we're talking about the operational side, the material loss of a battle is also extremely important to the big picture of the war. And we often don't talk about that because of course with war the thing to focus on is the human drama of it. Yes. Because we're humans. And I also think that what's interesting is that is the Nazi high command's response to Stalinrad which is not to go we're screwed. It's to double down. It's you know then so so Gerbles for example gives his infamous speech in the sports palace in third week of February 1943 where he goes are you ready for this? You know, this is now total war. The war is coming. This is a fight for survival. We're all in it together. You are in this as well. You know, every single one, every single German is now this is a fight for survival and we are now in total war. And and everyone is just so depressed by this. I mean, yeah, they realize that there is that they have they they will are going to reap what they have sown, you know, because everyone knows what's been going on in the Eastern Front because first part of the war, Germans have loads and loads of cameras. They're really into photographing everything, taking cine footage of everything. It's all part of recording the greatness of the Reich and the triumphs of the Reich. They want it recorded. So, all this stuff is bit like the radios is made very very cheap. So, lots of havoc and people are sending it all back and you know the people that are developing the stuff are all seeing it and people are talking about it and then it's being sent to families and they're all seeing it and they're seeing pictures of Jews being rounded up and beaten and they're seeing um Ukrainian partisans being executed and they're seeing villages being torched and everyone knows. They all know. Yeah. This whole idea is, you know, did they really know what was going on? Yeah, they do. They do know what's going on, you know, to lesser or greater detail. Of course, you know, there's some people who don't. And, you know, a bit like people know about the news today. Some people do, some people don't. I never read a newspaper. I never listen to the news, you know. So you you have that of course but but but it is widely understood and widely known that really brutal things have been going on in the east and and and troops are coming back utterly traumatized by what they have taken part in what they have witnessed the kind of unspeakable brutality. This is war on a completely different level to anything that's been kind of seen in recent years. Yeah. We should we should mention that you know the western front and the eastern front are very different in this regard. Yes. So a lot of the Holocaust by bullets. The Holocaust with the concentration camps and the extermination camps is not in Germany is not in the Western Front is in Poland is it's in the Soviet Union. Yeah. But don't forget that even Achvitz for example is part of the new Reich. It is part of you know it is part of an area which has been absorbed into Germany. So as far as they're concerned this has now got you know it's now no longer got the Polish name. It's now called Ashvitz which is a German name. It is part of Germany and there are German people moving there into this, you know, aircom model town and they all know exactly what's going on. Yeah. You, by the way, have a nice podcast uh series of four episodes on Ashwitz. um the evolution of the dream world town that becomes a a camp, a work camp, then becomes an extermination camp and a big boona factory for IG Farbin, which never produces a single bit of rubber. So th this for sure is uh something I would have to dive deep in. There's a book you've recommended, KL. Yes, it's just called KL. It's about the the whole concentration camp system. Um cuz K is concentration um in German. Laga is a is a camp. Um it's a it's an exhaustive book and I'm I'm full of admiration for him for for writing it just because cheap as it must have been. So I mean I I was very depressed doing that work on Ashvitz that deep dive. I just found the whole thing utterly dispiriting. Um and I've been there a few times and it's ghastly. Um so how he wrote a whole book on it I don't know. I think in the details there's a there's two ways I think to look at the holocaust. One is uh man's search for meaning about Victor Franco sort of this philosophical thing about how a human being can confront that and find meaning and what it mean what what does the human condition look like in the context of such uh evil. And then there is the more sort of detailed okay well how how do you actually implement something like the final solution? So you have this ideology of evil implemented. Yes. And at the fine detail of what what are the different technologies used? What are the different humans in the hierarchy of humans in a camp? How do they what's the actual experience of the individual person who shows up at a camp? Just get in the details and in those details I think there's some deep profound human truth that can emerge that the the the mundane um one step at a time is how you can achieve evil. Yeah. So you can get lost in the mundane. It's Yes. The benality of evil. It's um it's incredible. I I I think I think what what is so so completely horrific is is that you know, you know, half the six million were killed by kind of bullets at the back of the head. And the reason they stopped doing that and they wanted to stop doing that was because the guys said, the perpetrators were finding it so traumatic. You know, him goes and visits um an execution in Ukraine and or maybe he's in the Baltic States. I can't remember where he goes, but he but he witnessed some in, you know, in the summer of 1941. He thinks, "Oh, that's horrible." You know, they don't have to do that. I don't want my men having to do that. Got to find a more humane way of doing it. When you talk about more humane way of doing it, humane for the for the executors, executioners, not not for the victims because trust me, cyclone B is not a nice way to go. You know, it basic basically it's bursting all the capillaries in your lungs. It's extremely painful and and you you can no longer breathe and it can take up to 20 25 minutes. You know, some people it can take a couple of minutes. But all of those who are standing naked in that gas chamber, first of all, extremely humiliated by this process in the first place, then there's a sudden realization of that that they're not having a shower. They're actually being gassed and they're all going to die. Imagine what you're thinking as that process is you because you might be the first, but you're still going to even the first person is going to know that I can't breathe and I'm I'm dying. Everyone else is going to see the first few dying and then going to realize that is what's going to happen to them. And you've got those minutes, sometimes many minutes where you've got to contemplate that that and and that's that's in extreme pain and panic. And just think about how cruel that is while being humiliated all the way through. While being humiliated all the way through. And so the inverted commas humanity of of of the gas chambers is anything but. It's disgusting. A and the fact that people could do this is just beyond terrific. And then the fact that you are taking your Jewish prisoners and getting them to cut off all the hair, pull out the teeth of the dead before you put them on a lift and incinerate them. If you go to Avitz now and you go to the collapse, the blown up gas chambers which the Germans destroyed before the Russians overran them in January 45, you can still see some of the ash ponds. And there are bits of bone there but still there from the ash. It's just it is utterly repulsive. And imagine arriving from that train on that incredibly long journey where you've had no comforts whatsoever. You've had again you've had humiliations and privation you know the privations you've had to suffer as a result of that you know of having to kind of defecate in a bucket in the corner in front of other people. It's just horrendous. And then you get there bewildered and immediately your kids are taken away from you or your you know husband and wife who've been married 20 years. They're separated just like that, sent off into different groups, straight to the gas chambers. I mean, you know, it is it the the the scale of cruelty is so immense. It's it's hard to fathom. And the thing that I find really difficult to reconcile and this is where I think the, you know, the warning from history is important is that Germany is such an amazing nation. You know, it's it's it's the it's the country of Beethovven and Strauss and and and of Gerta and incredible art and culture and and and some of the greatest engineers and scientists have ever lived. And look how quickly it flipped into the descent of unspeakable inhumity which manifested itself in the Holocaust and the gas chambers um and the executions into pits and tiny places and creeks in Lithuania or Ukraine or whatever. I mean it's it's it's just horrendous. And you know this is from a nation which a decade earlier had been a democracy. It seems like as a human civilization, we walk that soldier in line between good and evil. Uh it's a thin line and we we have to walk it carefully. Yes. So I one of the great battles in uh in World War II on the Western Front is Normandy. I have to talk to you about Normandy. D-Day, the Normandy landings, the famous on June 6th, 1944. This was a Allied invasion of Nazi occupied Western Europe. What was the planning? And it was lengthy planning. What was the planning? What was the execution of the Normandy landings? Well, the decision to finally go into when the Americans joined the war in December 1941, there's the Arcadia conference few days later, week later between the British chiefs of staff and political leader Churchill and Roosevelt and his own chiefs of staff about what the policy should be. And the policy is to get American troops over to Europe as quickly as possible, get them over to Britain, get them training um and get them across the channel ASAP and and start the liberation of Europe. But the reality is that that that in 1942 the Americans just aren't ready. You know, they've gone from this incredibly tiny army. They're still growing. They've got no battlefield experience. The British are still recovering. You know, they're good on the naval power. They're kind of increasingly good on air power. Um but but but land power, they've had to kind of make up from the loss of their ally France and and expand as well. So kind of ground zero for both America and Britain has been kind of June 1940 1940 when France is out and suddenly that's the strategic earthquake and that's the the issue that needs settling and and they need to just completely realign everything that they they'd fought in 1949. They've got to start again but it's also becomes clear that it's they're not really ready in 1943 either. And one of the problems is is that Molotov, who is the Soviet foreign minister, has come over to Britain in May 1942 and said, you know, we need you to kind of do your bit and get on the get on the on the campaign trail against the Germans and fight on the ground. And the British sort of going, well, yeah, but you know, cross channel invasion is not really going to happen. We know we're doing that in North Africa at the moment. Then he goes over to Washington and and um and the Americans go, you know, we are definitely going to go and take on the attack to the uh the Germans in 1942. They've made this promise. So in the summer of 1942 it becomes clear that they can't keep that. So Churchill says, "Well, look, I've got here's an idea. You know, we're in we've got already got an army in in Egypt. Why don't we land another one in Northwest Europe? We can Northwest Africa. We can that's run by Vichy France, which is pro-ac French um colonies. Um why don't we take that? We can do that and then we can meet in the middle. We can pinch around. We can conquer the whole of North Africa. You can kill with two birds and one stones because you can get some experience fighting against Axis troops. you know, test some of your your your equipment and commanders, you know, what's not to like and then we can sort of see how it goes. So, this is a kind of opportunistic strategy, whereas the Americans are very much sort of, you know, we we want to draw a straight line to Berlin and that's the quickest way and let's do do it that way. So, it's a kind of a different viewpoint and but Roosevelt kind of gets that and agrees to that. So that's where the whole North Africa Mediterranean campaign comes from. And as a consequence of the huge commitment to Tunisia, you know, three and a half thousand aircraft, huge navies, you know, two army allied armies um in North Africa by the time Tunisa is won in midmay 1943. They think, well, we got all this here. We might as well kind of really try and get put the nail into the coffin of Italy's war, get them out of the battle. You know, Sicily is an obvious one. Let's go in there and then we can take a view. But between Sicily happening and the fall of North Africa is the Trident Conference in Washington. And that is where the decisions made. The Americans go, "Okay, enough of this opportunistic stuff. Let's just okay, we get it. We buy it. But no more faffing around. You know, May 1944, one year hence, we are going to cross the Atlantic." And the British go, "Okay, fair fair cop. We'll we'll do that." So So that is where Operation Overlord, as it becomes, gets given its code name, its operational name. That's when the planning starts. Serious planning starts at the beginning of 1944. And one of the lessons from Sicily to Normandy is that you can't have commanders fighting one battle whilst preparing for the next one. So you have to have a separate um uh command structure. And that's okay because by this time you got enough people that have got experience with battlefield command that you can actually split it. There are very good reasons for going into Italy, not least getting the fodger airfields so that you can further tighten the noose around around Nazi Germany. And one of the great prerequisites for the Normandy invasion is total control of air of the air of the airspace, not just over Normandy, but over a large swave of northwest Europe. Why is that? Because the moment you land in Normandy, the cat is out of the bag. And it's then a race between which side can build up meta material quickest. Is it going to be the Allies who've got to come from southern England, which is a distance of a slow journey across seas and a distance between kind of 80 and 130 mi away, or is it going to be the Germans that are already on the continent? Well, clearly on paper it's the Germans. So, you have to slow up the Germans. Well, how do you do that? You do that by destroying their means of getting there. So, bridges, destroy all the bridges over the sane, destroy all the bridges over the RVI, hit the marshalling yards. the German the glue that keeps the German war machine together is the Reichkes barn the German railway network. So destroy the railway as much as you possibly can and make it difficult for the Germans to reinforce the the the Normandy British head as and when it comes. But the way you do that in turn is by very low-level precision bombing and that has to be done by by twin engine faster smaller bombers going in low. But the problem is is you can't go low and and and destroy those bridges if you've got fucker wolves and measure smmiths hovering above you. So you've got to destroy those, which is why you need to have air superiority over this large wave of Northwest Europe to do that. The problem is that while the industrial heartland of Nazi Germany is in the west is in the rural era, which is very convenient for bombers coming out of Lincolnshire or East Anglia on the east flat east side of of Great Britain. the aircraft industry is much deeper into the Reich and it is beyond the the range of fighter escorts for the bombers and the American daylight bombers who are going over are discovering that despite being called flying fortresses they're not fortresses they're actually getting decimated and whenever their bombers go in strength over to try and hit the aircraft industry in Germany beyond fighter range they get decimated first infamously on the Schwin Reagers raid on the 17th of August 1943 coincidentally the same day that Sicily falls to the allies. Um, and also coincidentally the same day that face-to-face negotiations begin with the Italians for an armistice in Lisbon. But on that day of the 324 heavy bombers that the Americans send over to hit Schweinford and Regensburg where there are mesh plant and and also a ball bearing plant which is essential for aircraft manufacturing. Um, they lose 60 shot down and a further 130 odd really badly damaged. And even for the vast numbers of manpower and and bombers that are coming out of America, this is too much. So they can't sustain it. So they've got to find a fighter escort that's going to be able to escort them all the way into the into the Reich. And the race is on because basically if they haven't got one airspace by April 1944, it's game over. You can't do a cross channel invasion. You have to have that control of the airspace beforehand. So the race is on. Unfortunately, they come with a solution, which is the P-51 Mustang, which has originally been commissioned in May 1940 by the British, developed from sketches to reality in 117 days. It's a work of absolute genius. But Stal is harnessed with a really bad engine. The Allison engine is just not not right for that aircraft. And it's not until a Rolls-Royce Merlin, which is the same one that powers the Lancaster, the Mosquito, and Spitfire and Huracan is put into the P-51 Mustang that suddenly you've got your solution because that means it can now fly with extra drop tanks and fuel tanks, it can um it's it's so aerodynamic and it's so good. The higher it goes with this engine, the more fuel efficient it becomes, it can actually fly, you know, over,400 miles, which gets you not just to Berlin and back, but to Warsaw and back. So, suddenly you've got that solution. Uh a and actually by April 1944 they have cleared airspace and by the end of May 1944 just on the eve of the invasion uh operation overlord the closest German aircraft that is seen fighting um allied aircraft is 500 miles from the beach head. So it is absolutely job done. Meanwhile, new fighter, comparatively new um ground attack fighter planes like Typhoons and Tempests and adapted um uh um P-47 Thunderbolts are attacking the German radar stations all along the the coastline. They now do have an air defense system. Um they're destroying kind of uh um 90% of their effectiveness. And in the intelligence game, they're winning that one as well. They're just much better because in Germany, intelligence is power. So people tend to you know and Hitler always has this kind of divide and rule thing going on. So you have parallel command structures which is not conducive to bringing together of intelligence and while much play has been made about the successes of Bletchley and code breaking and all the rest of it. Actually what you have to do is you have to see the kind of the decrypts that the Bletchley cryp analysts do as just a cog and that those various cogs together from listening services to photo reconnaissance to agents on the ground to say the cogs collectively add up to more than some of their individual parts. So the intelligence picture is a broad picture rather than a than just codereing. But anyway they they win that particular battle as well. And what you see really with D-Day is, I think, is the zenith of coal coalition warfare. What you've got is you've got multiple nations who have different uh overall aims, different cultures, um different attitudes, different start points, but they have all coalesed into one common goal. And for until they've achieved that common goal, they're kind of put differences to one side. you know, much play has been made about kind of anglophobia amongst American um commanders and and America phobia amongst ally, you know, British commanders, but actually it's nothing. It's a marriage made in heaven compared to the way Germany teach looks after its own allies, for example. And what is remarkable about the um about the allies is they're not actually allies. They're coalition partners. So there's no formal alliance at all. And uh and there is a subtle difference there, but what you see them is you see them really really pulling together. And you see that manifest itself on D-Day, I think, where you've got, you know, 6,939 vessels of which there are 1,213 warships, 4,127 assaultcraft, 12,000 aircraft, you know, 155,000 men landed and dropped from the air in 24-hour period. It is phenomenal. It is absolutely phenomenal. And while it is still seen as a predominantly American show, all three service commanders are British. Um it is um most of the aircraft are twothirds of the aircraft are British. Uh twothirds of the men landed are British in Dominion. You never forget the Canadians who consistently punch massively above their weight in the Second World War. Um in all aspects, it has to be said, air, land, and sea. Um they're key in the Battle of the Atlantic. They're key um in air power. their key D-Day and indeed in the battle for Italy as well. So the Canadians should never be forgotten. Um but but one of the reasons it is that the the that it is the British Navy that dominates in in D-Day is because of course the the incredibly enormous strength of the Royal Navy in the first place. But partly because most of the US Navy is by this stage in the Pacific fighting its own own fight. So it's not slacking by any stretch of the imagination. It is it is because it's elsewhere doing its bit for the kind of overall Allied cause. But D-Day is just extraordinary, you know, and despite the terrible weather, uh, which is a such a debilitating factor in the whole thing. I mean, it puts people off course, means many more people get killed on Omaha Beach than they might have done and on other beaches besides incidentally. And actually, in terms of lives lost proportionally, it is the Canadians that suffer the worst, more so than the Americans. It's just as fewer of them um, overall. um D-Day has to be seen as an unqualified success. I mean it is absolutely extraordinary what they achieve and while they don't 100% achieve their overall D-Day objectives you know the objectives are always going to be the outer reach of what is is can be can be achieved and you'd need absolutely perfect conditions for that to happen and they don't get perfect conditions but they're so balanced they're so thought of absolutely everything and and their logistic supply and and I mean even things like the mind sweeping operation it's the biggest single mind sweeping operation of the entire war because there's huge minefields off the Normandy coast and ahead of the invasion force, the mind sweepers, which amount to I think something like 242 different mine sweepers in in five different operations AC opposite every single beach, creating lanes through these minefields through which the invasion force can go. Not a single ship is lost to a mine in the actual invasion. That is phenomenal and and and can only be done with the greatest of skill and planning and all in a period where you know there are no computers, there's no GPS, there's nothing. I mean it is it is absolutely astonishing and the scale of it is just frankly mind-boggling. Yeah. And that was really the the nail in the coffin the beginning of the end. Yeah. For for Hitler for the European theater. Yeah. Once you get the the only cause for doubt is will they be able to secure that bridge head. The moment they get that bridge head it is game over. There's only, you know, there is there is no other way it's going to be because of the overwhelming amount of men and material that the allies have compared to the Germans at this stage of the war. And of course, you know, you're being attacked on three fronts because there's the Italian front to the south and of course in a very major way, you've also got the Eastern front and operation which is launched that that summer as well is enormous. So, let's go to the very end. Uh the battle of Berlin. Yeah. Uh Hitler sitting in his bunker, his suicide, Germany's surrender. You actually said that Downfall, the movie was a very accurate representation. I think it is really except that Gerbles took Sonide and shoot himself. Details, but I think it's probably it might be my favorite uh World War II movie, which is strange to say because it's not really about World War II. It's about Hitler in a bunker. But I think uh was it Bruno Gance, wasn't there? I think I think he he nailed him. Yeah, that's there's so many accounts of that. There's so much written about Hitler. There's so many of there's millions and millions of Hitler's words that you can read. You know, there are translations of many of his conferences. You can see what he's saying. He can get inside his head in a very clear way and much more clearly than you can Stalin or just about any other leader really. And so what has a very very strong impression of what Hitler was like in the bunker in those last last days that just there's so many accounts of it and it just feels like they nailed it. It just feels like they've got it spot on to me. I mean it's a fascinating story of a evil maniac and then and this this certainty you know crumbling right like realizing that this vision of the thousand-year Reich is uh and Hitler says says you know my reputation won't be good to start off with but I hope in a few years time that people start to realize that kind of all the good I was trying to bring. Yeah that sort of they're all the same aren't they? You always believe you're doing good. Yeah. And there's so many deep lessons there. So now you have written so much, you have said so much, you have studied this so much. What to you looking at World War II is uh the lessons we should take away. Well, I suppose it's it's it's what happens when you allow these individuals to take hold of great power and great authority and make these terrible decisions. If you allow that to happen, you know, there are consequences and you have to be you have to recognize the moments of of trouble when they arise. So when there are financial crisis, you know that political unrest is going to come and you need to be prepared for that. You know, you need to be able to see the writing on the wall. You you can't you can't be complacent. You know, complacency is such a dirty word, isn't it? you know, you've got you've got to keep your wits and and you can't take things for granted. You've got to recognize, I think, um, that the freedoms we enjoy in the West are, you know, they're not necessarily permanent and you need to make the most of them while you've got them and cherish them and consider what happens if the milk turns sour and what the consequences of that are. I mean, actually overriding because although I don't think it'll ever be a a war on the scale of the Second World War, you've only got to look at pictures of those opening days of the war in Ukraine and see sort of knocked out Russian tanks and dead bodies, bloated bodies all over the place, put that into black and white and, you know, it could be the road out of fal in 1944. It could be, you know, any number of German battlefields in in the in World War II and and the similarities and the trenches and the kind of people hiding in foxholes and, you know, that that's that's horribly reminiscent as are the huge casualties that they're suffering on both sides, whether they be Russian or Ukrainian. And, you know, it's a shock. It's a shock to see that. Um, and it reminds you of just how quickly I think things can descend. So that's that's uh that's the other thing you know that point I was making about how quickly Germany descended from this amazing nation of arts and culture and science and development and engineering into one of the Holocaust. I mean life is fragile and and peace is fragile and you know it's you take it for granted at your peril and you take for granted at our peril that nobody will use nuclear weapons ever again and that's not a thing we should take for granted. No sir. What gives you hope about the future of human civilization? We've been talking about all this darkness in the 20th century. What's the source of light? The source of light is that I think the vast majority of people are good people who want to live peacefully and want to live happily and are not filled with hate. And there are some brilliant minds out there. And I think the capacity for the human brain to come up with new developments and new answers to problems and challenges is infinite. And I think that's what gives me hope. James, this is uh I'm a big fan. This was an honor to talk to you and please keep putting incredible history out there. Um I can't wait to see what you do next. Thank you so much for talking today. Well, thank you, Lex. It's been a It's a privilege to talk to you. Thanks for listening to this conversation with James Holland. To support this podcast, please check out our sponsors in the description or at lexfreeman.com/sponsors. And now, let me leave you with some words from Winston Churchill. If you're going through hell, keep going. Thank you for listening and hope to see you next time.